FOUNDED BY I GOL,D\VIN O SMITH I 1901 

HARRIE.TS>MTH 




iur7 










THE FIRST LETTER BOOK 



OF THE 



EAST INDIA COMPANY: 

l6oO 1619 



of Itrttrro 

of the 

<Soti*rnour an& Company of 

of Hontion trading into tljt 



1600-1619 



EDITED BY 
SIR GEORGE BIRDWOOD M D KCIE 

ASSISTED BY 

WILLIAM FOSTER B'A 



O? 8' T6\lTO (3oV\r) ILIAD I 5 




PICCADILLY LONDON 

ANNO DOMINI MDCCCXCIII 



SEEN BY 

PRESERVATION 

SERVICES 



DATE. 



DtC 1 6 



<3. Herman ani> Son, printer*, t>art Street, 
Covciit Garten. 



IS? 



TO THE 

SETT PREMCHUND ROYCHUND 

HINDOO MERCHANT 
OF 



ilogal ettg of 



WHO NEVER LOST HIS HEAD IN PROSPERITY, 

NOR HEART IN HIS ADVERSITY, 

AND WHOSE SPLENDID ENDOWMENT 

OF LEARNING AND CHARITY IN WESTERN INDIA 

TIME, WHICH TEMPERS AND PROPORTIONS ALL THINGS, 

WILL LASTINGLY RECKON UNTO HIM 

FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS, 

I, EVER GAZING 
WISTFULLY 

EASTWARD 

ACROSS THE SEVEN SEAS, 

DEDICATE THIS VOLUME. 



" Omnis, in Arctois, populus, quicunque pruinis 
Nascitur, indomitus bellis, et Martis amator. 
Quicquid ad Eoos tractus, mundique teporem 
Labitur, emollit gentes dementia coeli." 

LUCAN, PJiarsalia, viii. 363. 

" Sero respicitur tellus, ubi fune soluto 

Currit in immensum panda carina salum." 

OVID, Amores, ii. u, 23. 

" God is mightier and wiser than we, therefore He does 
with us according to His pleasure." 

GOETHE, Maxims. 

" We sail'd wherever ships could sail ; 
We founded many a mighty state ; 
Pray God our greatness may not fail 
Through craven fear of being great." 

TENNYSON, Hands all Round. 

" Worthless is the Nation that will not joyfully stake 
its all for honour." 

SCHILLER, Maid of Orleans. 









0918 



INTRODUCTION 




"And Thomas eke with his beyete Of Ynde." 

GOWER : Confessio Amantis, Liber v. 



|N the preface to the second reprint, by Messrs. W. H. 
Allen & Co., in 1891, of my Report on the Old Records of 
the India Office, after gratefully testifying to the admir- 
able manner in which the Registry at the India Office 
had, since 1879, been rearranged, and its contents made readily 
accessible to the public, by Mr. F. C. Danvers, the Registrar 
and Superintendent of Records, and to the attention that was 
simultaneously being given by Mr. George Walter Forrest, B.A., 
Director of Records, Calcutta, to the custody of the state archives 
in India, I ventured to express the hope that means might be 
devised for reproducing those records in print more fully and rapidly 
in the future than had been found possible in the past. They have 
hitherto chiefly been used for the compilation of " Memoirs " 
on the history and organization of different Departments of the 
Government of India ; and of " Selections," giving an account 
of the policy and procedure of the various branches of British 
Administration in India. The Memoir on the Indian Surveys 
prepared by Mr. Clements R. Markham, C.B., in 1871, and since 
followed by a continuing volume from the pen of Mr. C. E. D. 
Black, is a classical example of the former kind of official 
publications; while of the latter we have recently had a brilliant 
illustration in Professor Forrest's Selections from the Records of the 

b 



viii INTRODUCTION. 

Foreign Department of the Government of India, 1772-85. There 
are, besides, Mr. Noel Sainsbury's five monumental volumes of 
Calendars of State Papers : East Indies, which include the two India 
Office series of " Court Minutes" and " Original Correspondence" 
from 1599 to 1634. 

But the Government both at home and in India might, I 
contended, still further promote the diffusion of a thorough 
knowledge of the rise and progress of the British Indian Empire, 
by encouraging private enterprise, firstly, in the facsimile repro- 
duction of such graphic documents in their possession, or in that 
of private persons, as those photo-lithographed by Mr. William 
Griggs of Peckham in the Journal of Indian Art for July, 1890, 
January and April, 1891, and July, 1892; secondly, in the publication, 
verbatim et literatim, of selected series of the records, such as the 
" Court Books " or " Court Minutes," and " Original Corre- 
spondence," after the manner of the publication, in 1886, by 
Mr. Henry Stevens, of Vermont, U.S., of the first volume [1599- 
1603] of the " Court Books," under the title of The Dawn of 
British Trade to the East Indies; and finally, by extending the 
utmost possible assistance to trained scholars of recognized 
literary capacity, who would be found willing to rewrite the history 
of British India, or well-defined portions of it, direct from the 
stored muniments of Bombay, Madras, Calcutta, and the India 
Office. 

Through my innate delight in the handling of trade products 
and the study of their history, and through the lines in which 
my official duties have been cast, and the opportunities thus 
afforded me, as well as by the limitations of natural capacity, 
it is in the two first directions that I have personally been 
most interested in furthering the general utilization of the India 
Office records. It was, therefore, with the liveliest satisfaction 
that, about eighteen months ago, I received a letter from Mr. 
Bernard Quaritch, offering, in the most generous terms, to bring 
out a second fac-simile volume of the records, in series with 
Mr. Henry Stevens' Dawn of British Trade to the East Indies, if I 
would select the volume, and edit it for the press. I thought at 
first of the second volume of the " Court Books," but ultimately 
settled on the present volume; and chiefly because of the 



INTRODUCTION. ix 

obscurity it had lain in for three hundred years, whereas the 
" Court Books " had been made well acquainted and familiar 
to us through Mr. Noel Sainsbury's invaluable " Calendars." 
The volume was known to Thomas Rundall and used by him 
in his Narratives of Voyages towards the North-West in search of a 
Passage to Cathay and India [Hakluyt Society, 1849], wherein he 
entitles it " Court Miscellaneous Book " and " Court Miscellany 
Book " ; and it was known to Mr. Bolton Corney, who, in The 
Voyage of Sir Henry Middleton to Bantam and the Maluco Islands 
[Hakluyt Society, 1855], reproduced, more or less completely, 
ten of the documents it contains, calling it " Court Miscellaneous 
Book." But after this it was lost sight of for about thirty years. 
It was certainly not handed over to Mr. Sainsbury when he com- 
menced his " Calendars " of the India Office records ; and when, 
on page 151 of his first volume, he comes across a reference [in 
the " Court Book " for 1607] to the present volume, he notes : 
" This register is missing." It was overlooked by me when, in 
1879, 1 examined and reported on the supplementary miscellaneous 
" Old Records " enumerated in the " Statistics and Commerce 
Departmental List No. 2397," and other Departmental Lists of 
the India Office ; and the lost volume was only found again when 
these records were exhaustively explored and collated under the 
direction of Mr. F. C. Danvers, on his appointment as Registrar 
and Superintendent of Records in January, 1884. 

The volume has been generally known as the "Miscellaneous 
Court Book," and that is the description inscribed on its label. 
There seems, however, to be little doubt that the proper title 
is the one now adopted, viz : " The Register of Letters, &c." 
of the Governour and Company of Merchants of London trading 
into the East Indies. This is the title by which it is designated 
in the earlier "Court Minutes"; 1 although later on it seems to 
have lost its original title and is referred to as " the booke wher 
y e Commissions be." 2 It is in fact the first Letter Book and 
Register of the " London " or " Old " East India Company. 

Nothing definite has been determined regarding the date, and 



1 See pp. 152, 219, 236, 267, 305, and 307 infra. 

2 See p. 446 infra. 



b i 



* INTRODUCTION. 

the copyists of the volume. It must of course have been in 
existence at the date of the first entry in the " Court Minutes " 
relative to it, viz 28th March, 1607;* but probably not long 
before. The handwriting of the first portion of the MS. 
would appear to be identical with that of the second volume 
of the " Court Minutes " or " Court Books," commencing 
the 3 ist of December, 1606, and differs from that of the first 
volume, 1599 to 1603. The documents up to about 1606-7 are 
entered carefully, and one may presume leisurely. They are 
well written, with the initial words in " Old English " letters. 
This, together with the fact that they are only roughly in 
order of date, suggests the hypothesis that they were entered 
up all at once, from drafts already on hand, rather than as they 
were from day to day received. On the other hand, the volume 
cannot have been begun later than about November, 1607, for it 
contains a document of that date, corrected and interlineated, as 
though first drafted in it, and corrected there ; and a letter of the 
2ist of December, 1607, entered by another writer, who has also 
made a corresponding entry in the index. Probably the volume 
dates from the latter half of 1606. The only entry in the " Court 
Minutes" that may possibly militate against this conclusion, is 
that of the 6th of July, 1607, ordering that "all letters 
be entred into a Booke and Coated for future memorie as 
occasion may fall out." This would seem to imply the non- 
existence of the present volume. But it may only mean that 
the " Adventurers of the Fourth Voyage " wished to have 
their letters entered up with regularity and care, or, still more 
probably, it may refer to a separate book. Certainly some of 
their letters to the East Indies are entered in the present volume, 
but none from the East Indies. 

The first half of the MS. is all in one handwriting, while the 
rest seems to be in two or three, and soon gets more and more 
hurried and scrabbled ; and it may plausibly be conjectured that 
the copyist of the first half was William Leighton, Secretary to the 
" Third Voyage " [1606-9] , and presumably the official who kept the 
second volume of the " Court Minutes" commencing the 3ist of 

1 See note, p. 152 infra. 



INTRODUCTION. xi 

December, 1606, the handwriting of which, as has already been 
said, is the same as that of the first part of the present volume. 
The objection might be raised that, in February and March 1609, 
when William Leighton was away from office, and a substitute 
was appointed to attend the Court Meetings in his place, no 
alteration is perceptible in the writing of the Minutes. We know, 
however, that the filed Minutes were not written at the time of 
the Court Meetings, but were entered afterwards from rough 
notes ; and the probability is that the substitute took the notes of 
the Minutes, and that William Leighton wrote them in subsequently 
on his return to duty. So careful a caligraphist would never have 
willingly tolerated the interpolation of any inferior penmanship 
in the " Court Books " regularly kept by himself. Leighton 
seems to have been elected Secretary some time in 1606. He 
was re-elected in July, 1607, July, 1608, and July, 1609 ; and then 
he disappears from view. By a Minute of the 28th of August, 
1607, he was ordered to have 162 a year from the " Adventurers 
in the Fourth and Fifth Voyages." 

In reproducing the volume every endeavour has been made 
to present a rigidly accurate and literal copy of it ; and with 
this end in view the original has been followed even in its 
blunders. Most of these are self-evident, but where they might 
possibly prove misleading an explanatory note has been appended. 
In the same scrupulous adherence to Mr. Henry Stevens' plan of 
reproduction the original punctuation has been preserved. In short, 
the only liberty taken with the text has been in, here and there, 
conjecturally supplying, within square brackets, an obviously 
missing word. Reproducing the volume in this way, verbatim et 
literatim, has of course involved the employment of a few types 
somewhat unfamiliar to modern eyes. They will, however, be 
readily understood. Thus: p means "per" or "par," as in 
"pfect," or "pticular"; fe means " ber," as in " Robt " ; p 
means "pro," as in "pfit" and " pvidence " ; f is equivalent to 
a final " s " or " es," as in " merchauntf " or " damagf " ; 
while a mark over or through a letter, or a letter raised above 
the line, signifies the omission of an adjacent letter. Similarly, 
wherever the copyists have changed their own style of writing, 
in order to emphasize a word, or have engrossed an initial or 



xii INTRODUCTION. 

important word, with the same object, the alteration has been 
marked in the printed reproduction by a change of type as from 
" roman " to " italics," or from " small type " to " capitals." 
The only exceptions to these rules are that, in the marginal 
insets and the footnotes, no " peculiars " have been used, contrac- 
tions being written out in full ; and that in one or two instances 
in the text, such a word as " Robt" occurring in " italics " has been 
turned into "Robert." Both these deviations were followed simply 
because " peculiars " in the kinds of type used for the marginal 
insets, footnotes, &c., were unobtainable without having matrixes 
cut expressly for them, and it was not worth while going to this 
cost for so limited a use. 

After William Leighton, until nearly the end of the book, 
the perfunctory copyists gave up engrossing the first word of each 
document in " Old English " letters ; and, in accordance with 
strict rule, the ornamental first letter and capitals for the rest 
of the word ought also to have been dropped in the printed 
reproduction of the Register; but I found it impossible to so 
far sacrifice the lust of the eye to the witness of a consistently 
good conscience, whatever the consequences 

" Of every worldes cure 
Fortune slant in aventure 
Parauntur well, parauntur wo. 
But how as ever that it go, 
It shall be by my honde assaied " 

and I have accordingly continued the use of the ornamental 
letters and capitals for all the initial words to the end of the 
volume. 

The notes are, for the most part, based on gleanings from 
Purchas his Pilgrimes and from the India Office records, in consulting 
which Mr. Noel Sainsbury's Calendars of State Papers : East Indies 
have been of inestimable service. For the rest, except in the 
case of obvious and well-known works of reference, full acknow- 
ledgment has been made, in each instance, of the sources of 
information. 

The official value of the volume consists in the early date, 
and important character, of the documents it contains. Over 
one-fourth of them are of the first six years [1600 to 1606] of the 



INTRODUCTION. xiii 

existence of " The London East India Company," commonly 
called " The Old East India Company," a period of which the 
records have hitherto been extremely meagre. Exclusive of the 
" Court Minutes," there are only fifty-four original MSS. in the 
India Office belonging to the period, and of this number forty-eight 
are included in the present volume ; while of a large proportion 
of the one hundred and seventy-eight letters and commissions 
embraced in it, no other first-hand copies are known. The 
volume is especially serviceable in filling up the gap caused 
by the never-to-be-sufficiently-regretted loss of the " Court 
Books " or " Court Minutes " for 1603-1606, and 1610-14, and 
in thus sustaining the continuity of the contemporary official 
records for the first obscure years of the " Factory Period " in 
the history of the East India Company, extending from the 
formation of the " London " Company in 1600 to its absorption 
in the " English Company trading to the East Indies " in 1709. 

This period of purely commercial operations may be divided 
into three well-marked sub-periods ; the first from 1600 to 1623, 
the date of the " Massacre of Amboyna," during which the 
Company pushed its trade in the East Indies under the greatest 
difficulties, but without exciting much popular attention ; the 
second from 1623 to 1660, during which, partly in consequence 
of the national solicitude aroused by the massacre of the 
Company's Agents at Amboyna, a general competition was rapidly 
developed throughout the country for a participation in the com- 
merce of the East Indies ; and the third and last, from 1660 to 
1709, during which this disastrous rivalry at length resulted in the 
amalgamation of the "London," or "Old," and the "English," or 
" New," Companies, in the " United Company of Merchants of 
England trading into the East Indies/' commonly known as " The 
Honourable East India Company;" whose great commercial 
Empire was sequestrated to the British Crown in 1858. The 
present volume, it will be found, throws a flood of fresh light on the 
home and Indian affairs of the Company during a considerable part 
of the first section of the great "Factory Period" of their career. 

The volume, in short, covers all the years of the Company's 
" Separate Voyages," and the first seven years of their " Joint 
Stock Voyages." 



xiv INTRODUCTION. 

Of the twelve "Separate Voyages," "The First," 1601, 
under James Lancaster, consisted of the Red Dragon, Hector, 
Assention, Susan and Guift ; 

" The Second," 1604, under Henry Middleton, consisted of 
the Red Dragon, Hector, Assention and Susan ; 

"The Third," 1607, under Keeling, consisted of the Red 
Dragon, Hector and Consent ; and William Hawkins, who com- 
manded the Hector, left her at Surat, and proceeded to Agra ; 

"The Fourth," 1608, under Sharpey, consisted of the 
Assention and Union; 

" The Fifth," 1609, was under David Middleton in the Consent, 
the only ship sent ; 

" The Sixth," 1610, under Sir Henry Middleton, consisted of 
the Trades Increase, the Peppercorn, commanded by Nicholas 
Downton, and the Darling; 

"The Seventh Voyage," 1611, was under Anthony Hippon in 
the Globe, the only ship sent ; 

"The Eighth," 1611, under John Saris, consisted of the Clove, 
Hector and Thomas ; 

"The Ninth," 1612, was under Edmund Marlowe, in the 
James [James I.], detached from the " Tenth Voyage"; 

"The Tenth," 1612, under Thomas Best, consisted of the 
Hoseander, Solomon [i.e. James I. again] and Red Dragon; 

" The Eleventh," 1612, under Best in the Solomon, detached 
from the " Tenth Voyage "; 

And "The Twelfth," also in 1612, was under Christopher 
Newport, in the Expedition ; which was commissioned chiefly to 
carry Sir Robert Sherley [brother of Sir Anthony], Ambassador 
from Shah Abbas to King James I., back to Persia, where he 
died in 1628. 

Of "the Joint Stock Voyages," "The First," 1614, under 
Downton, consisted of the New Year's Gift, Merchant Hope, Hector 
and Solomon, and is the only one on the Joint Stock account of 
any general interest. The fleet which sailed in January, 1615, 
under Peyton, took out Sir Thomas Roe, on board the Lion, as 
Ambassador from James I. to the " Court of the Great Mogol " 
Qehanghier, 1605-27] at Agra. Another, under Benjamin Joseph, 
consisting of the Charles, Unicorn, Globe, Swan and Rose, sailed 



INTRODUCTION. xv 

in February, 1616, with Edward Terry on board the Charles, 
as "Chaplain to the Right Hon ble Sir Thomas Row, Knt:". 
William Baffin served in the fleet, consisting of the London, 
Hart, Roebuck and Eagle, which sailed in February, 1620, under 
Shillinge. The latter was killed in an encounter with the Portu- 
guese fleet in January, 1621, off Ras Jask, and was buried near 
the town of Jask ; while Baffin died in January, 1622, of a wound 
received at the siege of a Portuguese fort on the island of Kishm, 
where he lies buried. John Davis, who sailed as pilot on board 
the Tiger, in Sir Edward Michelborne's independent voyage in 
1604, was slain in December, 1605, in an encounter with a 
Japanese junk in the Straits of Malacca, and there found his 
watery grave within sight of the island of Bintang. 1 

At home these twenty years were marked, in the general 
history of England, by the insurrection of Essex, the occupation 
of Kinsale by the Spaniards, the debates in Parliament on 
monopolies, which Queen Elizabeth consented to abolish, all 
of which events took place in 1601 ; the death of Elizabeth and 
accession of James I. in 1603 ; the treaty of peace concluded with 
Spain in 1604 ; " the Gunpowder Plot " in 1605 ; the first 
permanent English settlement in America, made at Jamestown 
by the Virginia Company in 1608 ; the commencement of the 
colonisation of Ulster by the English and Scotch, and the 
institution of the order of Baronets in 1611 ; the negotia- 
tions with Spain concerning the marriage of Prince Charles, 
and the landing of the first Puritan settlers in America 
in 1620, the same year in which the German Protestants 
were defeated at the battle of Prague ; and the incessant 
quarrels of James I. with his successive Parliaments, namely, 
those of 1604, J 6i4 [the "Addled Parliament"], 1621 and 1624, 
the last finally declaring monopolies to be illegal: while in the 
particular history of the Company, these same years are notable 
for the grant of their first charter by Queen Elizabeth, dated the 
3ist of December, 1600, "to 1615," and of the twelve charters 
of James I., namely: (i) of 23rd February, 1604, licensing the 



1 See The Life of John Davis, 1550-1605. By Clements R. Markham, C.B., F.R.S. 
George Philip and Son, 1889. 



xvi INTRODUCTION. 

transport of 12,000 into the East Indies ; (2) of gth August, 
1606, permitting the Company to sell spices in bulk for exporta- 
tion ungarbled ; (3) of 5th January, 1607, and (4) of 8th February, 
1608, licensing the transport of 20,000 in each of these years ; 
(5) of 22nd May, 1609, licensing the Company to sell to other 
merchants ungarbled spices in whole packs, to be by them 
transported in whole packs ; (6) of 3ist May, 1609, making the 
monopoly granted by Queen Elizabeth "perpetual"; (7) of 4th 
December, 1610, providing that neither the Company, nor 
their merchandises, should be thereafter sued, vexed, arrested, 
molested, or disquieted in respect of their trading, with other 
privileges; (8) of I4th December, 1615, confirming the right of 
the Company to transport to the East Indies foreign silver, 
either as brought into the Kingdom, or coined anew in the Mint 
within the Tower of London; (9) of nth July, 1617, renewing 
the licenses granted to the Company to sell ungarbled spices, 
and transport silver; (10) of i6th January, 1618, renewing the 
license to transport foreign bullion; (n) of 4th February, 1623, 
granting the Company the right to chastise and correct all 
English persons residing in the East Indies and committing any 
misdemeanour; and (12) of nth October, 1624, pardoning the 
Company for certain offences, and granting to them such sums 
of money, and other goods and merchandises "as did belong 
to the King." 

The above brief enumeration of the Company's " Voyages/' 
and of their "Charters" or "Letters Patent" of Monopoly, 
Confirmation, License, and Privilege, during the first quarter 
of the seventeenth century, will serve to explain almost any 
document in the present volume, wherever it may be opened. 

Although these years were " the day of small things " with the 
Company, the reaction of their narrow operations on the wider 
history of England was even then apparent, not only in the 
Parliamentary discussions on monopolies, but in the whole 
intellectual activity of the time, especially as applied to the 
consideration of the question of protection or freedom in com- 
merce ; which was not definitively determined for this country 
until 1846, and then not absolutely and unequivocally, for the 
correlated and subsidiary problem of combination or freedom in 



INTRODUCTION. xvii 

labour still remains unsolved by us : the popular tendency of the 
moment seeming, indeed, to be to decide it violently, that is, by 
provoking the antagonism of political parties on the question, in 
defiance of those fundamental principles of economic progress, the 
unrestricted working of which has within fifty years made the 
words " foreign countries " an unmeaning phrase for Englishmen 
by making the whole world Britain. 1 

The contemporary influence of the Company's early voyages 
is to be traced even in the plays of Shakespeare ; and the uniform 
success of all the "Separate Voyages," excepting "the Fourth/' 
at once stimulated those commercial and industrial controversies 
in which were gradually laid the solid foundations of the economic 
philosophy that found its first systematic, and, to the present day, 
its greatest, exponent in Adam Smith. It is in the second and 
third portions of the great "Factory Period" that these polemical 

1 Compare Spenser's lines in "The Ruines of Rome " ; which are far more true 
of the proud commercial empire of the English people, than of the merely military 
conquests of " those antique Caesars sleeping long in darke " : 
" Who list the Romane greatnes forth to figure, 
Him needeth not to seeke for usage right 
Or line, or lead, or rule, or squaire, to measure 
Her length, her breadth, her deepnes, or her hight ; 
But him behooves to vew in compasse round 
All that the Ocean graspes in his long armes ; 
Be it where the yerely starre doth scortch the ground, 
Or where colde Boreas blowes his bitter stormes. 
Rome was th' whole world, and al the world was Rome ; 
And if things nam'd their names doo equalize, 
"When land and sea ye name, then name ye Rome ; 
And, naming Rome, ye land and sea comprize : 

For th' auncient Plot of Rome displayed plaine 
The map of all the wide world doth containe." 

We have, in truth, by means of the leverage of our free-trade policy, raised the 
whole world in company with ourselves, our colonies, and dependencies, to the highest 
pitch of industrial and commercial greatness yet reached by mankind. 

The great evil that has grown up with free trade, as established in the United 
Kingdom, is the concentration of wealth, often of inordinate wealth, in the 
hands of a few, and the corresponding increase in the number of the unemployed 
poor ; and the most pressing social need of our generation is the more equable 
distribution of wealth among all classes of the community : but this is not to be 
brought about by aggressive combinations of labour, with their direct corollary in 
universal commercial protection against foreign competition ; a return to which would 
but hasten our emphatically trading empire to swift decay. 



xviii INTRODUCTION. 

publications become more and more numerous and significant ; 
but already, between 1600 and 1623, the year of the Massacre of 
Amboyna, the following, all of recognized importance, had 
appeared : 

Gerard Malynes' England's View in the unmasking of two 
Paradoxes, 1603 ; 

Tobias Gentleman's England's Way to win Wealth, 1614 ; 

Britains Busse, by E. S., 1615 ; 

Trades Increase, by J. R., 1615 ; 

Sir Dudley Digges' Defence of Trade, 1615 ; 

Thomas Mun's Discourse of Trade from England to the East 
Indies, 1621 ; 

E. Misselden's Free Trade, or the Means to make Trade flourish, 
1622 ; 

Circle of Commerce, 1623 ; 

Gerard Malynes' Lex Mercatoria, 1622 ; and 

- Centre of Circle of Commerce, 1623. 

J. Hagthorpe's England's Exchequer, a Discourse of the Sea and 
Navigation, 1625, also belongs essentially to the same empirical 
stage in the development of economic doctrine reached by the rest 
of the writings on the sovereignty of the seas, state monopolies, 
private enterprises, the exportation of bullion and coin, exchanges, 
the balance of trade, et cetera, all published during the reign 
[1603-25] of James I. 

If to these works we add Frangois Pyrard de Laval's Voyage 
to the East Indies, between 1601 and 1611, with Pietro Delia Valle's 
Travels in Turkey, Persia and India, between 1614 and 1626, and 
the logs of the early voyages of the East India Company preserved 
by Purchas, and all these to the present volume, and the rest of 
the contemporary India Office records, it becomes clear that 
there are now materials enough available for a complete and 
almost exhaustively detailed account of the twenty-three years of 
the obscure and carefully experimental beginnings of the East 
India Company. I only wish that Mr. Walter Besant would take 
up the period for illustration in one of his healthful historical novels. 
The scenes, the properties, the dramatis persona, the authentic 
history, even suggestions of the love story underlying it, are all 
there ready to his creative hand ; and a secondary serio-comic 



INTRODUCTION. xix 

character, the double martyr to love and conscience, of unique 
originality. This was one of the Company's servants in India, 
whose letters to his principals are full of remorseful confessions 
of the influence over him of the alluring beauty of the Hindu 
women, and of his grotesque contrivances for resisting it. 

" In eche of them he fint somewhat 
That pleseth him, or this, or that. 
Some one, for she is white of skinne, 
Some one, for she is noble of kinne, 
Some one, for she hath a rosy cheke, 
Some one, for that she semeth meke, 
Some one, for she hath eyen grey, 
Some one, for she can laugh and pley, 
Some one, for she is longe and small, 
Some one, for she is lite and tall, 
Some one, for she is pale and bleche, 
Some one, for she is softe of speche, 
Some one, for she can dance and sing, 
So that something of his liking 
He fint, and tho no more he fele 
But that she hath a litel hele, 1 
It is inough, that he therefore 
Her love, and thus a hundred score." 

At last he can no longer withstand it, and writes to inform his 
employers that, rather than yield to the overmastering tempta- 

1 The Hindu women of the higher castes, or as it might now, under British rule, 
be more accurately said, of the wealthier classes, are remarkable for the perfect 
proportions and dainty modelling of their hands and feet, the classical beauty of 
which is enhanced in its effect on the beholder by the unrestrained ease and natural 
grace of their whole presence, demeanour and carriage, as they recline in statuesque 
repose, or move about, like the immortal goddesses of Homer, enwrapped in the long 
elegant folds of their bright flowing draperies. Their olive-tinted hands, passing into 
ivory white on the palms, moderately plump, and with straight firm fingers, tapering 
to the tips, are the sweet gracious hands of the Capitoline Leda, the hands attributed 
also by the Greeks and Romans to Pallas Athene. Their feet are the fair feet of the 
Medicean Venus, smoothly rounded, high arched in sole and instep, full and elastic 
in the tread, the toes all delicately dimpled at the articulations, the second being 
longer than the first, and the little toe " preternaturally small," as some modern 
critics have ignorantly affirmed of the masterpiece of Cleomenes [I.], and with the 
strongly knit round "heels of Atalanta," one of the lesser pulcheritudes ascribed 
to Aspasia. They are the " winged heels " of the poets, and, with the corresponding 
springy tread, are the result of the free exercise throughout unending generations of 



xx INTRODUCTION. 

tions to which he was exposed, he has subjected himself, by the 
topical application of a douche of molten lead, to a voluntary 
humiliation difficult to parallel anywhere in the heroical hagiology 
of Christendom. And there ends this strange, new Confessio 
A mantis. 

The incident is a humorous illustration of the familiar rela- 
tions always maintained between the Company and their servants 
in India ; based, as the present volume repeatedly indicates, on a 
devout sense of their responsibility in each other's well-being. 
When the Company was first founded, the feudal tradition of the 
affiliation of servants to their masters had not yet become 
obsolete in England, and, during the second half of the six- 
teenth, and the first half of the seventeenth centuries, it was, 
indeed, strengthened by the elevating spiritual significance given 
to all the conditions and concerns of our temporal existence by the 
prevailing puritanism of the times ; and notwithstanding that men 
have of themselves but little strength to rise above their natural 
frailties, the age was undeniably one of high religious profession 
and formality, touching and adorning the humblest details of 



the naked, or the simply sandaled, foot. But now-a-days, Hindu ladies, particularly 
in the Presidency towns of India, under the blighting influences of our western ideas 
of impropriety, are becoming more and more opposed to appearing in public with 
uncovered feet, and are rapidly accustoming themselves to the use of shoes and 
slippers. In Bombay they had already in my time almost universally adopted the 
Persian style of slipper ; and since then they have taken to English shoes, happily, 
made up in all sorts of coloured stuffs, and even, as I am informed, to stockings. It 
is saddening that in this way the healthful, picturesque habits of the ancient Aryas 
should one after the other be obliterated in their last surviving sanctuary, leaving 
the life of the modern world lowered to the dead level of the timid uniformity of the 
self-conscious West. But in spite of their going into shoes and stockings, and the 
scarcely less unwholesome abomination of gloves, the Hindu women will always 
retain an attractiveness, especially their own, in the automatic, rhythmical comport- 
ment, whether in rest or action, of their shapely hands and feet, which I can compare, 
in English art, only to the unlaboured freedom and refinement of the disposition of 
the feet and hands, as of the limbs generally, in Thomas Stothard's charming 
compositions of female figures. And after all, for lovely woman is supreme over 
every detraction, the "glancing," beneath waving robes, of "many twinkling feet," 
all in their "finical shoes" of gayest dyes and spangled over with sparkling gold, 
will make a pretty picture anywhere, and is a sight to be constantly seen in the 
loftily shadowed streets, and among the spacious suburban gardens, of the many- 
languaged Town and Island of Bombay. 



INTRODUCTION. xxi 

public and domestic life; and the East India Company and their 
agents at least endeavoured to give as full effect to them in the 
practice of the amenities, charities, and moralities of the Christian 
faith, as was within the capability of contemporary humanity. 
The Company's servants of the period have, on account of the 
apparently extravagant eating and drinking that was constantly 
going on in the Indian factories, been held up to odium by 
superficial writers, as an ungodly set of gluttons, drunkards, and 
miscellaneous debauchees. But they were obliged to systemati- 
cally keep open table for the entertainment of passing European 
travellers, in whose gratefully appreciative reports these unmerited 
reproaches have, for the most part, originated ; while the truly 
fearless fashion of their hospitality was but part of the high 
Roman living of their day. Those read in the seventeenth 
century receipts for such dishes as " florendines," " battalias," 
" pulpatoons," "tansies," and even " an amulet of eggs," as then 
prepared, and for such "entertaining waters" as "cock-ale," 1 know 
that it was an age " of lusty drinke and lusty mete." Moreover, 
as in northern Europe, the Phoenician receipts, received chiefly 
through the Romans, had gradually been modified by the addition 
to them of ever increasing quantities of solid flesh, so the same 
receipts received in India, chiefly through the Arabs, had been 
modified by continually subtracting from the original prescriptions 
of meat, and adding to those of vegetables and spices ; and thus 
it came about that the cookery of the Company's factories, which 
continued to be more or less that of Anglo-Indians down to the 
suppression of "the Mutiny" in 1858, combined the aggravated 
solidity of the English cookery of the reigns of the Stuarts, with the 
fiery high-flavouring of the Indian cookery of the Mo(n)gol Empire. 
By the beginning of the eighteenth century, receipts for Indian 
" paloes," and for "mangoes" in the sense of "pickles," with the 
verb " to mango," melons, cucumbers, &c., appear even in our 
English cookery books. " That accursed Bombay punch," so 
named from its five [in Sanskrit pancha] ingredients, and thus 

1 " Cock Ale " is made by bruising an old cock, " the older the better," bones and 
all, with three pounds of raisins, mace, cloves, &c., and stirring it all thoroughly 
with two quarts of sack, digesting it for nine days in ten gallons of ale, and then 
bottling off, and leaving it " the same time to ripen as other ale." 



xxii INTRODUCTION. 

stigmatised by President Gerald Aungier in his Letter of the 
24th of January, 1675/6, was, after all, no " plausive invention" of 
the English factors at Surat, but probably an immemorial oriental 
beverage, similar, as pointed out in the first edition [1879] of my 
Report on the Old Records of the India Office, to the irevra7r\6a 
of Athenaeus. * These simple, rude fellows, were, in short, average 
samples of the Englishmen of the middle classes of their time ; 
a time of general elevation of the national character, to 
which the Company and their servants, in spite of the " bad 
bargains " among their number, contributed in a marked degree. 
There can be no mistaking the spirit of godliness to be traced 
throughout their business letters and other official documents, 
and which frequently finds formal expression in the valedictory 
style observed in their correspondence with each other. This 
simple natural piety of theirs has indeed become the noblest 
inheritance of the Indian services, ever growing, in depth of 
fervour and breadth of charity, with the growth of our Imperial 
responsibilities toward India. It is the true basis of the structure 
of our supremacy in India, as all who had the privilege of 
studying on the spot the men who suppressed " the Mutiny " of 
1857 can never hesitate in acknowledging; and if, through the 
lowering social and political clouds at present overshadowing 
the Old World, we may still venture to contemplate with serenity 
the future of India, under the hegemony of the United Kingdom, 
it is because no other rulers of the nations are more practically 

1 All the strong drinks of which the poets have sung may be traced back to 
the East, not only chronologically, but, so to say, genealogically, or through the history 
of the descent of the receipts for them. Ambrosia, the drink of " immortality " of the 
Greeks, is the amrita [Sanskrit for "immortality"] of the Hindus; and although the 
word originally had a purely physiological significance, it soon came to be identified 
with some heavily sweetened intoxicating "beverage of the gods of the Aryas." 
Mead, the famous Anglo-Saxon brew, " brose," or broth, of spirit and honey, similar 
to the " methygllyn " of Devonshire, was the Greek fiiOv, a honied wine, and the 
Hindu madhu [Sanskrit for " sweet "], the luscious liquor distilled from the flowers 
of the madhuka, mahua or " Mowra Tree," Bassia latijolia. Nectar, as Athenaeus tells 
us, was a Babylonian wine, and its name is obviously the comparative form of the 
Persian nek, " good," i.e. nektar, "better ; " used in its superlative degree of nektarin, 
"best," in Europe as the name [generally said to be the Italian diminutive, nettarino, 
of nettare, nectar, and, again, an adjectival form of nectar], of the variety of the 
peach known as the nectarine, Amygdalus Persica, var: B. Nectarina. 



INTRODUCTION. xxiii 

impressed than those who administer the government of that 
noble country with the truth taught by all secular history, that, 
in " morall Gower " 's ancient diction : 

" There is a State, as ye shall here, 
Above all other on earthe here, 
Which hath the londe in His balaunce. 
To Him belong-eth the legeaunce 
Of clerke, of knight, of man of lawe, 
Under His honde all is forthdrawe, 
The marchaunt and the laborer, 
Sostant it all in His power, 
Or for to spille, or for to save." 

The present volume is, if possible, even more useful than 
Mr. Henry Stevens' Dawn of British Trade in the East, for the 
information it affords of the measures taken by the Company to 
secure their trade with the Indian Archipelago and India, for it 
deals, not as the " Court Minutes " of 1599-1603 principally do, with 
the organization of the " First Voyage," but, for the greater part, 
with the instructions given by the Company to their agents 
regarding the actual articles of trade to be exchanged between 
the East Indies and Europe; and in the minuteness and com- 
prehensiveness of these instructions, and the energy and per- 
severance with which they were carried out in every part of the 
Indies, we have one of the secrets of the Company's unprecedented 
success. Theirs was indeed the same procedure as is being 
adopted by the Germans in the present day, with the result that the 
latter are beginning to supplant us wherever, through our own 
supineriess and neglect, we have given them an opening to the 
littoral and insular markets of the Indian Ocean. We seem 
indeed to be losing the art of seizing the opportunity of new 
markets for ourselves, and standing steadfastly by them. The 
other day when the British South Africa Company assembled 
in the City to hear Mr. Rhodes expatiate on their position and 
prospects, we were told that there was something very Elizabethan 
in the meeting. Save in coats, hats, and umbrellas, the scene 
was said to be identical with that presented at the preliminary 
meetings of the East India Company in the sixteenth century. 
It is something that pride should be taken in making the 



xxiv INTRODUCTION. 

comparison. But the East India Company never suffered itself 
to be deluded with the Will o' the Wisp idea that "Trade 
follows the Flag;" and the French have over and over again 
demonstrated for our edification that only too often it does 
not. The Company was even reluctant that our flag should 
follow their trade, as was inevitable ; while, because our flag 
at first the banner of St. George, then the " Union Flag" of 
1606, and, finally, the " Union Flag" of 1801 cautiously waited 
on their trade, wherever it was at last planted in India there it 
remains to this day ; and will remain so long as it is upheld as 
the sacred symbol of the unity of the British Empire under the 
paramount protectorate of the United Kingdom. 1 Again, some 
years ago, a promoter of the Imperial British East Africa Com- 
pany, asking for some light to be thrown on their contemplated 
leap into the dark, and being advised to read the earlier 
" Court Books " of the East India Company, turned away, like 
Naaman, in contempt, protesting the philanthropic purposes 
of his abnormal adventure. But the East India Company, 
while always religiously observing the responsibilities of 
proprietorship, took infinite pains to first make sure of their 
property, and never in the whole course of their history 
attempted the practice of philanthropy at the expense of other 
people. The result of the contrary policy of vicarious benevolence 
is to be witnessed in the present deplorable condition of the 
Empire of Uganda, one of the most picturesque, luxuriant, and 
fertile regions of Central Africa, rich also in mineral wealth, but 
now reduced to inextricable anarchy and desolation by the wicked 
warfare waged along all its verdant uplands, and through 

1 " Also remember the cities, our colonies, 

out-lying States in the East and the West, 
Scattered about to a distance surrounding us, 

these are our shreds and our fragments of wool ; 
These to one mighty political aggregate, 

tenderly, carefully, gather and pull, 
Twining them all in one thread of good fellowship ; 

thence a magnificent bobbin to spin, 
Weaving a garment of comfort and dignity, 

worthily wrapping a People therein." 

ARISTOPHANES [by B. Bickley Rogers], The Lysistrata. 



INTRODUCTION. xxv 

all its umbrageous valleys, by the rival Catholic and Protestant 
sects into which its population of two million souls has been 
divided, thanks to the impotency of the East Africa Company to 
fulfil the most elementary duties of their lightly assumed vague 
sovereignty. 

The highest value of the present volume is in the faithful 
record it has preserved of the character and conditions of the 
great secular trade between Europe and Asia at the very 
instant when England first entered on her now fulfilled possession 
of it ; and its highest interest in reference to the consequences of 
the dexterous measures then taken by the East India Company 
to obtain a footing in it, involving as these did the whole future of 
the United Kingdom. The current of this trade, at first, and 
for four milleniums, through Mesopotamia and Egypt, and then 
round the Cape of Good Hope, and, after nearly four centuries, 
once again through Egypt, has, from its forgotten beginnings, 
determined the destinies of the historical nations of the Old 
World; and now we find it dominated by the United Kingdom not 
only along both its competing courses, but at all its perennial 
head springs, in the tropical fertility of India, Farther India, the 
Indian Archipelago, and the East Indies generally, from Abyssinia 
or " Middle India," to China or " Superior India." The history 
of the Old World has, in brief, been the history of its commerce 
in the dye stuffs, cloth, and spice, and gold of India ; and it was 
the fame of the East Indies for their fresh spices, deep toned dyes, 
bright cloths, and precious stones, and wrought gold and silver, 
and sumptuary arms, that led Columbus on to the unexpected 
discovery of the New World of the Americas. 

The elaborately broken coast line stretching obliquely from 
the British Isles gradually southward through a distance, as the 
crow flies, of from 8000 to 9000 miles, until it ends in the Indian 
Archipelago, naturally invited the population along its entire 
length to mutual commerce, not simply by the facilities it affords 
for inter-communication, but also by the infinite variety in 
the productions of the temperate and tropical zones they have 
to offer each other. Once settled by the human race, it 
was inevitable that a great commerce, having its inexhaustible 
sources in " the world's green end " of Homer's " blameless 

c i 



xxvi INTRODUCTION. 

Ethiopians," 1 should grow up everywhere along this remarkable 
coast line. The renown of the riches of the trade with India, 
and the Indian Archipelago, was propagated from the earliest date 
all over Asia and Europe in the Legends of the Earthly Paradise, 
the Sea of Riches, the Land of Gold, &c. ; and the geographical, 
mercantile, technical, and other myths of universal fable and 
folk lore, are the vague broken traditions of the immemorial 
trade, in its prehistoric origins, pursued for countless generations 
along all these shores of old romance. For centuries this commerce 
was carried on, not directly between one country and another, 
but through innumerable intermediate agencies, so that distant 
countries knew each other only by their productions and the 
strange " travellers' tales," that grew in wonder as they passed 
from mouth to mouth between the East and West. The very 
name of India 2 remained unknown among the nations of the 
Mediterranean Sea for centuries after its costly perfumes had 
been in daily use in the service of the Tabernacle at Shiloh, and 
afterward of the Temple at Jerusalem, and for milleniums after 
their earliest use for embalming the dead in Egypt. 

This southern coast line of the continent we arbitrarily 
divide into Europe and Asia is interrupted between the 
Mediterranean Sea and the Indian Ocean by the Isthmus of 
Suez ; and as the peninsula of Arabia extends from this point 
about 1500 miles southward, the Isthmus of Suez really presents 
the length and breadth of Arabia as an obstruction to the direct 
transit of the trade between the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian 
Ocean ; and as it is twice as long from Suez to Aden as from the 

1 From the right bank of the Nile 

" Eastwarde, Asie it is algates 
Till that men comen to the gates 
Of Paradis, and then Ho ! " 

GOWER, Confessio A mantis. 

2 It is first used in this its Hellenised Persian form [Hindu] by Herodotus. It is 
indeed used still earlier by Homer in its Hellenised native Sanskrit form of atvciiiv, 
but not as the designation of the country, but of its fine cotton stuffs, or muslin, 
the sindhu of a pre-Homeric cuneiform inscription of Babylonia, and sadin of the Old 
Testament. Compare " cendalum " and sendal, or cendal, the Low Latin and early 
English names of old Indian silks, resembling the "Liberty silks" of the present 
day; and also silk and serge, both these words being formed from the Latin " serica,' 
" silken "-garments, literally (of the) "Seres," i.e. " Chineses." 



INTRODUCTION. xxvii 

Mediterranean Sea to the head of the Persian Gulf, the commercial 
advantages of the Red Sea route, even after the discovery of 
sailing to India by the monsoons, have always been nearly 
equalled by the comparative shortness of the route by the Persian 
Gulf and Euphrates Valley. Thus from " the deep backward and 
abysm of time "these two lines have competed on almost equal 
terms for the commerce of India, and the competition between 
them is the true key to the history of the successive states and 
empires that rose and fell along their course ; rose as they gained 
the trade of India, and fell when they lost it. 

So important are the positions in connection with the Red Sea 
and Persian Gulf that not only was there always a rivalry between 
the nations on the Persian Gulf, and those on the Red Sea, but 
it was a vital question among the latter whether the trade should 
go by the Gulf of Akaba, or the Gulf of Suez. The rivalry 
successively of Assyria and Babylonia with Phoenicia on the one 
hand, and Egypt on the other, and again between Jerusalem and 
Tyre, and Jerusalem and Petra, that finds such startling 
expression in the prophetic denunciations and lamentations of 
Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, had largely for its origin the 
competition for the monopoly, or at least a share, of the 
profits .of the commerce between the Indian Ocean and the 
Mediterranean Sea. The overwhelming advantage of the Semitic 
races, and particularly of the Arabians and Phoenicians [for 
the Hebrews were unfortunately placed between the Idumaeans 
and Phoenicians] was that from the dawn of history they were 
already in occupation of all the lands separating the Mediterranean 
Sea from the Indian Ocean. This gave them their start in the 
civilisation of the world. The Phoenicians in the Mediterranean 
Sea, and the Arabians in the Indian Ocean, at once engrossed 
in their own hands the whole of the trade between the countries 
of the Mediterranean Sea and the countries of the Indian Ocean ; 
the Arabians keeping possession of their share of it without inter- 
ruption until Vasco Da Gama [A.D. 1497] opened up the trade to 
India by the Cape of Good Hope. Ultimately the Phoenicians and 
their colonies were forced to succumb to the rivalry of Assyria 
and Greece and Rome. Yet Tyre was not finally destroyed until 
taken by the Crusaders, who, behind their religious professions, 



INTRODUCTION. 

were chiefly influenced in their operations by the sordid interests 
of the commercial Italian States of the twelfth century. 

During the three hundred years subsequent to Da Gama's 
enterprise the Red Sea and Persian Gulf routes gradually 
fell into disuse, but are now regaining their former import- 
ance ; and to safeguard them against all danger as the future 
channels of the rapidly increasing commerce of Europe and 
America with Asia and Australasia has become one of the 
highest political obligations of the British Empire. Commerce 
always sets steadily toward the shortest routes, and under the 
pressure of the competition of the modern world, Egypt and 
Mesopotamia will become the chief commercial highways between 
the East and West. Commercial supremacy, the only sure 
foundation of political supremacy, is absolutely dependent on the 
opportunity of roads and markets, or on strategical points and 
communications as military men call them. Indeed war is only 
another form of commercial antagonism, seeking by violence the 
same advantages commerce often more surely secures by its 
slower, deadlier sap. It was of comparatively little consequence 
that the three successive Egyptian empires, and the Assyrian 
and Babylonian monarchies were overthrown, or that ancient Tyre 
was twice razed to the ground, for while the commerce of India 
still went by the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf the people 
prospered ; but when the Portuguese outflanked these routes by 
doubling the Cape of Good Hope, then Egypt became indeed 
" a base kingdom," and " great Babylon " " a refuge for the wild 
beasts of the desert," and Nineveh " a desolation," and Tyre " a 
place to spread nets upon." If 

" Peace hath her victories 
No less renown'd than war," 

her defeats also are not less terrible and crushing, and are far more 
enduring in their disastrous results. The discovery of Da Gama 
made the whole of Anterior Asia a desert, and impoverished all 
the countries of the Mediterranean Sea, for more than three hundred 
years. Their revival, already notable in the instances of Italy, 
Greece, and Egypt, may be formally dated from the reopening of 
the overland route between India and Europe by Lieutenant 



INTRODUCTION. xxix 

Waghorn in 1845, and was placed beyond all future hazards by 
the successful opening of the Suez Canal on November 17th, 
1869, and the insurance of its freedom and neutrality by the 
British settlement of Egypt in 1882-3. 

Modern research is gradually teaching us that it is impossible 
to give too early a date to the origin of this life-giving trade 
between the East Indies and Europe. In its primeval inceptions 
it was probably little more than an insensible interchange of pro- 
ductions maintained from the first migrations of the Caucasian 
races westward, in the wake of the daily revolving sun. It was in 
this way possibly that the saffron crocus, Crocus sativus [in Sanskrit 
kamkama, whence the Greek /C/JOACO?, and Arabic zafran, and kurkum, 
Latinised as "curcuma," turmeric], found its way from Cashmere 
into all the countries of the Eastern Mediterranean. But it must 
have been by a regular trade, organized by the Sabaean Arabs 
and Chaldaeans, that muslin, entered in early cuneiform lists 
under the name of sindhu, 1 in Greek a-ivSwv, and teak, found 
among the ruins of the Akkadian temple at Ur, 2 and blackwood, 
discovered by Rassam among the ruins of Jamjama, both 
exclusively Indian woods, were carried into Babylonia ; and 
by a regular trade, organized by the Arabians and Phoenicians, 
that indigo, the name of which, signifying the " Indian " 
dye, came to the Greeks [a/St/eo?] and Romans \_indicum~] 
later through Persia, and cotton [Arabic koton^, tamarind 
wood [Arabic tamar u'l Hind, "date of India"], and Indian 
garnets and carbuncles, and the Indian elephant and Indian 
bear, were imported into Egypt, before the date of the new 
Theban Empire founded by the i8th Pharaonic dynasty, B.C. 1700- 

1 The sadin of Judges xiv. 12, 13, Proverbs xxxi. 24, and Isaiah iii. 23. 

2 The only question is whether the teak was used in the original construction of 
the temple by the Akkadians, or in its reconstruction by Nebuchadnezzar, B.C. 605- 
562. Eutychius, the Patriarch of Alexandria, A.D. 933-40, records a tradition of saj 
timber, i.e. teak, the sag of Western India [Edrisi's " Land of Saj "], having been 
used in the building of Noah's Ark; and Theophrastus, who died B.C. 287, says that 
the ships of Tylos, or Tyros, in the Persian Gulf, mentioned in some traditions as 
the original seat of the Phoenicians, were made of a wood that lasted 200 years ; and 
this could only have been teak, of which the Arabian ships on the Indian Ocean are 
still all built. The "gopher wood " of which, according to Genesis vi. 14, the mythical 
ark was constructed, is generally identified with the "cypress," tirzah, of Isaiah 
xliv. 14 ; but the term is translated saj in the Arabic version of the Pentateuch. 



xxx INTRODUCTION. 

1400; and that ivory and tin became known to the Greeks by 
their Sanskrit names, eXe^a? [Sanskrit ibhd], and /caoWre/jo? 
[Sanskrit kastira], and cotton in the form of the ^ITM [the 
Arabic tunic of cotton cloth], before the age of Homer. The 
" tripple-gemmed earrings," ep^ara Tply\r)va, of the Iliad [xiv. 
183] and Odyssey [xviii. 298] are also generally supposed to have 
been of Indian [Cingalese] pearls, but as they are described as 
" mulberry "-coloured, fiopoevra, they were probably of Indian 
carbuncles or garnets. In any case the Greek name for the pearl 
fiapyapLTTj? is the Sanskrit maracata. 1 The fragment of carved 
ebony found in " the Homeric Ilios " may have been sent from 
the Malabar Coast of India, or from Ceylon, or the Indian 
Archipelago, but more probably it came from Upper Egypt, or 
Inner Africa. The Hebrew Scriptures of the Old Testament are 
full of indications of the early importance of the Indian trade. 
The bdellium of Genesis ii. 12, and Numbers xi. 7 [bdolach, in 
Sanskrit madalaka, the f3&e\\wv and fj,aSa\tc6v of Dioscorides, in 

1 Some are of opinion that maracata is derived from /japynpi'rTjd but the pearl is 
an Eastern product ; and others that the Greek derivative from maracata is fffidpaySos, 
a word first used by Herodotus, and identified with either the aqua marine or the 
emerald ; but although these gems are found in southern India and Farther India 
respectively, neither has an Indian name resembling maracata, while both are in 
Persian named zamarud. In such difficulties the original derivation of the denomi- 
nation of any articles that became famous in the great historical trade between the 
Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea may be determined with tolerable surety 
by the knowledge of the original place of their production ; an indication never 
sufficiently regarded by oriental and classical scholars and philologists, but which, 
when duly considered, makes it clear that very few of the Sanskrit denominations 
of such articles are derived from Greek and Latin originals, and that the majority of 
the Greek and Latin denominations for them are derived from the Sanskrit, either 
indirectly, through the mediation of the Arabians or the Persians, or directly, during 
the intimate intercourse that existed between the Greeks and the Indians under 
Alexander the Great, and the Diadochi. The Greeks seem to have introduced many 
geographical and historical names into Sanskrit, and innumerable scientific terms, but 
not the denomination of a single commercial product, unless it be mulva [fi6\v(3os], 
"lead," nor of a single manufacture other than kalinas {xdXivos}, "a bridle," or 
industrial appliance excepting surunga [irDpiyg], "a (mine) shaft." They also intro- 
duced the salutation khera [xp ] "hail!", and the words lopaka [nXtinrr}^], a "fox," 
and kamelaka [ica/ijjXof], "a camel," and this is the sum of their indisputable contri- 
butions, of the kind here discussed, to the vocabulary of Sanskrit ; notwithstanding 
that plausible suggestions have been urged for the addition to it of samida [atp.iSa\iQ\, 
"fine flour." i.e. " simnell," hangnl [Ktyxpos], " Fanicum italicum," kasturi [(caaroptoi/ 
of Dioscorides and Galen], "civet," and even hastira [Kayairtpos, as if compounded 



INTRODUCTION. xxxi 

Hindi mukul], whether it be bdellium, the gum resin of Balsam- 
odendron Mokul, and other species of Balsamodendron, as is almost 
certain, or, as some argue, musk, and the aloes 1 of Psalms 
xlv. 8, Proverbs vii. 17, and Canticles iv. 14 \_ahalim, in Sanskrit 
agaru, the dyd\\o%ov of Dioscorides and gv\a\6ij of Aetius] , the 
eagle-wood, or aloes-wood of modern commerce, the coarser 
quality of which is produced by the Aquilaria Agallocha, and the 
finer, distinguished as calambac [Javanese kalambak], by Aloexylon 
Agallochum, are distinctive products of India and Farther India. 
The spikenard of Canticles i. 12 [nerd, in Sanskrit nalada, in 
Greek z/ap&o?] , the root of N ardostachys Jatamansi, is exclusively a 
product of Nepaul at high elevations ; and the cassia or, as it 
should be translated, costus of Psalms xlv. 8 [ketzioth, in Sanskrit 
kushta, in Greek ATOCTTO?], the root of A ucklandia Costus, exclusively 
of Cashmere ; the original habitat also, as has already been 
noticed, of the saffron of Canticles iv. 14 [karkom, in Sanskrit 
kamkama, and in Arabic zafran] . The cassia 3 of Exodus xxx. 24, 

of Kara and (ridtjoos !], " tin." On the other hand Sanskrit supplied to Greek a long 
list of adopted designations of Indian trade products ; viz. : dydXXoxov and Zv\a\6t} 
[agaru], " eagle wood," dpytAAiW [narikela], the "cocoanut," (35k\\iov and fj.aSa\Kov 
[madalaka], " bdellium, " flfjpvXXos [Vaiduriya], the " beryl, "jSourupov [bhutari], "butter," 
iXtyaQ [ibha], "ivory," iyy/73tpis [sringavera] "ginger," iWieov [Sindhu], "indigo," 
KaXafios [kalama], "culm" of reeds, sedges, sweet flags, et cetera, iea//06pa [karpura], 
"camphor," KctvvafitQ [sana], "hemp," Kapiraaos [karpasa], "cotton," KapvoQvXXov 
[kaduaphalla] "cloves," icivvdflapt [kinnabari] "dragons blood," KOOTOS [kushta], "costus," 
icpoKros [kumkuma], the " crocus " and " saffron," XUKKOS [laksha] gum-" lac," 
[tamala-patra] leaf of Cinnamomum Tamala, ^ttapyaptrjjs [maracata], " the pearl," 
[muskha], "musk," vdpdos [nalada], " nard," oTrdXXtos [upala], "the opal," opv%a 
[vrithi, in Tamil arisi], "rice," TreTrept [pipali], "pepper," aaydXivos [saka] 
"teak," aavraXov, ffdvSavov, T^avSdvr} [chandana], " sandalwood," adic^apov [sakhara] 
" sugar," aaffa^tivov, ffijaafiivov [sisu] "blackwood," and ffivS&v [Sindhu], "muslin." 
To Latin Sanskrit directly gave cinnabaris [kinnabari], "gum dragon" [later 
vermilion"], curcuma [kumkuma], "turmeric," garyophyllum [kaduaphala], "cloves," 
indicum [Sindhu] " indigo," malabathrum [tamalapatra] leaf of Cinnamomum Tamala, 
sulphur [sulvari], "sulphur," "sacondas," " sacos," and "sapenas" [saphena], an 
unknown amethystine stone, and zingiber [sringavera], "ginger." It took from Latin 
absolutely but the two words Romaka, " Roma," and dinara, "denarius." 

1 This, the most precious of perfumes, must not be confused with aloes [Syriac 
alwai], the malodorous inspissated juice of Aloe indica, A. socotrina, and other species 
of Aloe. The aloes of the island of Socotra [Sanskrit dvipa Sakhadara, " island of the 
Blest"] was known to the Greeks in the fourth century B.C. The ahalim [" lign 
aloes "] of Numbers xxiv. 6 refers to some unidentified tree. 

2 The ingredients of the "oil of holy anointment," Exodus xxx. 23, 24, are cassia 



xxxii INTRODUCTION. 

and Ezekiel xxvii. 19 [kidah], the bark of Cinnamomum Cassia, is 
a product of the Malabar Coast of India, and the cinnamon of 
Exodus xxx. 23, Proverbs vii. 17, and Canticles iv. 14 [kinamon, 
and with cassia Kiwdfueftov], the bark of C. zeylanicum of Ceylon. 
The camphire of Canticles i. 14 [copher] is identified with Lawsonia 
alba, originally a native of the East Indies, and the well known 
henna plant of Egypt, north Africa and Cyprus; while the calamus 1 
of Exodus xxx. 23 [kaneh bosem], Canticles iv. 14, and Ezekiel 
xxvii. 19 [kaneh], translated "sweet cane" in Isaiah xliii. 24 
[kaneh'], and by " sweet cane from a far country" in Jeremiah 
vi. 20 [kaneh hattob~\, is exclusively a native of India, and the 
source of the " grass oil," or " ginger grass oil " of modern 
commerce. The " almug trees " " from Ophir " of i Kings x. n, 
12, and " algum trees out of Lebanon " of 2 Chronicles ii. 8, and 
ix. 10, n, have generally been identified with the sandalwood 
tree, Santalum album [advbavov of Aetius, in Sanskrit chandana] 
of southern India; while the ebony of Ezekiel xxvii. 15 [hobnim, 
? e/3ei/o9 iroiKiXr) of Theophrastus, calamander, Diospyros dubia~\, 
certainly refers to the ebony of North Canara [D. melanoxylon] or of 
Ceylon and the Moluccas [D. Ebenum~\, and not to African ebony, 
the botanical source of which is unknown. The word cotton is 
not used in the authorised English version of the Old Testament, 
but in the passage of Esther i. 6 : " Where were white, green, 
and blue hangings," the Hebrew word translated green is karpas, 
the Sanskrit karpasa [tcdpiracros of Dioscorides] , "cotton" [in the 
pod], an aboriginal Indian production; and the passage should 

[kidah], calamus [kaneh bosern] , cinnamon [kinamon'] , and myrrh [mor] ; and of the 
" pure and holy perfume " "put before the testimony in the tabernacle," verse 34, 
onycha [shecheleth] , galbanum [chelbenah'], and frankincense [lebonah]. The four first 
are all Indian products, and galbanum, though chiefly obtained in Syria and Persia, is 
sometimes also gathered up to the right bank of the Indus. Frankincense, long 
supposed to be the product of the Boswellia thurifera of India, I have shown, in rny 
paper " On the Genus Boswellia," Linnean Society's Transactions, Vol. xxvii., 1871, to 
be really obtained from several species of Boswellia [B. Carterii, B. Frereana, B. Bhau- 
Dajiana, et cetera'] in the Somali horn of Africa, and southern Arabia. Onycha is still 
imported into Bombay to mix with frankincense in the prepared perfumes used in 
the Hindu temples there. Myrrh is obtained from an unidentified African tree. 

1 The Sanskrit kalama, and its Greek derivative Ka\o/ios, with some qualifying 
adjective, designates a variety of sedges, grasses, and sweet flags; and possibly the 
palm Borassus flabelli/ormis. See note i, page xxx. 



INTRODUCTION. xxxiii 

rightly be read : " Where were white and blue [striped] cotton 
hangings." The peacocks mentioned with apes, ivory, silver and 
gold, in i Kings x. 22, and 2 Chronicles ix. 21, are true Indian 
peacocks, as is proved by the Hebrew word used for them, 
tukkiyim, being identical with the Sanskrit name taki ; which 
seems to reappear also in the Greek name -^nrrafc6<; or a-trrd/crj 
of the parrot, the " Indian bird " l of Ctesias, circa B.C. 400. 
The Hebrew word kophim, here used for apes, is also the 
Sanskrit kapi ; while the phrase skcn-habim, literally "teeth of 
elephants," used for ivory, is based on the Sanskrit for elephant, 
ibha, the habba of the Assyrian monuments, and the initial source, 
apparently, of both the words elephant \_el-ephas] and ivory. The 
gold imported by Solomon from Ophir [the Sophir of Josephus] , 
now justly identified with Sopara, the capital of the North 
Konkan, B.C. 1500 A.D. 1300, is specified in 2 Chronicles iii. 6, 
as "the gold of Parvaim," a designation in which, through the 
Sanskrit parva, " the East " [literally " before " the worshipper of 
the rising sun, applied by the Hindus to all the countries east of 
the Ganges], 2 we may trace an indubitable reference to India 3 
or the Indies generally ; including " the land of Sinim," of Isaiah 
xlix. 12, that is of the Indo-" Chineses " of Farther India, and 
southern China, the classical Sinae. The classical fables of the 
"gold-digging ants," and of the Arimaspians who fought with the 
" gryphons " 4 for the gold they guarded, both refer to the gold of 
Thibet guarded by the mastiffs [gyake] kept by the miners for the 
purpose. The horn of one of these "gold-digging ants," said by 
Pliny to have been preserved in the temple of Hercules at Erythrae, 
-was simply the pickaxe of wild sheep's horns used by the Thibetan 

1 " a caged green bird within an Indian ship." WILLIAM MORRIS, Life and 

Death of Jason. 

2 Thus in Bombay a Hindu from beyond the Ganges is known as a Purbiya ; a 
designation not to be confounded with that of Pardasi, from para, "another," and 
desi "country," i.e. "a foreigner," used in Bombay for any Hindu not belonging to 
the Presidency, but more definitely for a Rajput. Parbhu is a Mahratti word, and 
denotes the indigenous writer caste of Western India. 

3 In Genesis ii. n, 12, bdellium, a distinctive Indian product, and the onyx 
stone, also an Indian product, are associated with gold as products of Havilah, the 
quarter of the Garden of Eden wholly encompassed by the river Pison, which has 
always been identified with either the Indus or the Ganges. 

4 See my article on " Indian Jewelry " in the Graphic of Nov. 26th, 1881, pp. 537-8. 



xxxiv INTRODUCTION. 

gold diggers. 1 The peacock is represented in polychromy on 
the walls of Sargons Palace at Khorsabad, B.C. 722-705 ; and was 
already in the fifth century B.C. consecrated by the Greeks to 
Here, and kept at her celebrated temple on the island of Samos. 
The head and neck of the domestic fowl, like the peacock, an 
exclusively Indian [including Farther India] bird, appears as a 
stuffed curiosity, with the Indian elephant and the Indian bear, 
on one of the monuments of Thotmes III., "the Alexander the 
Great of Egyptian history," B.C. 1600-1566; again, with the 
head and neck arranged as a triskelion, on the reverse of the coins 
of Lycia, B.C. 700-500 ; while later the bird is seen fully figured on 
a Babylonian cylinder of the seventh century B.C., and on the 
Harpy monument at Xanthus in Lycia, circa B.C. 600-500 ; and on 
the reverse of the coins of Dardanus, and the obverse of those of 
Himera, both B.C. 480-400. The domestic fowl and aloes wood of 
Farther India, the musk, bdellium, saffron, costus, nard, borax 
or tincal and gold of northern India, and the hemp [in Sanskrit 
Sana, the Kavvaftis of Herodotus] , salep, and poppy plants, together 
with the Balas [i.e. Badakshan] ruby, lapis Lazuli [i.e. Lajwardi, 
or " stone of Lajward "] and Turquoise [i.e. " Turkish " stone] of 
Central Asia, have probably, notwithstanding that some of them 
long remained anonymous to Europe, been current in the trade 
between the East and West from the earliest associations of the 
Caucasian races with northern India. 

Passing from the Old Testament and the Iliad and the Odyssey, 
we find that of famous Indian products, indigo, sesamum seed 
[arfo-a/jLov'] , castor oil [/cpormv'] and hemp [of Central Asia], are 
named, among the writers known to the West, first by Herodotus 
in the fifth century B.C. ; rice [in Tamil arisi, in Arabic aruj~\ first 
by Strabo, and the diamond [aSa/ta?] , opal [oTraXXto?, in Sanskrit 
upala] and black pepper [Trevre/jt, in Sanskrit pipali] first by 
Theophrastus, in the third century B.C. ; and gum dragon 
[" cinnabaris," afterward vermilion], long pepper ["piper 
longum"], turmeric [" cypira herba Indica "] , ginger [" zingiber," 
in Sanskrit sringavera], cloves [" garyophyllum," in Sanskrit 
kaduaphala] rusut [lycium, \v/ctov of Dioscorides], and rhubarb 

1 It is interesting in this connection to note that the alluvial gold of India, is 
from the form of its grains, named in Sanskrit pipilika, " ant-like "-gold. 



INTRODUCTION. xxxv 

[" rhacoma," from S. E. Thibet] first by Pliny in the first century 
A.D. Sugar [Sanskrit sharkam, Greek araK-^apov] would seem 
to have been heard of, as a distant curiosity, by Herodotus and 
Theophrastus, but is first distinctly named by Dioscorides in 
the second century A.D. Indian ghi [fiovrvpov (meaning, in 
Hipparchus and Galen, some salve), in Sanskrit bhutari], " Bombay 
blackwood " [<j)a\dyyc0v a-rjcrafjiLvov, sisu of Bombay] , gum lac 
\\aKKos, ? rj\KTpov of earlier Greek writers] , vdicivOos, ? the ruby of 
Ceylon, and cowries, if vav7r\ios oA,/ye>5 may be so translated, are 
first named in the Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, attributed to 
Arrian, also in the second century A.D. ; the beryl [ftrjpv'XXos, in 
Sanskrit Vaidurya, i.e. of Vaidura, ? Ceylon] is first named by 
Dionysius Periegetes in the third century A.D. ; and the cocoanut 
\_dp<yt,\\iov, in Sanskrit narikela] by Cosmas Indicopleustes in the 
sixth century A.D. These articles may all have possibly been 
imported into the countries of the Mediterranean for generations 
before they were named by the above writers ; but the trade of the 
East with the West is not more remarkable for the antiquity of its 
origin than for the slowness of its continuous development. Even 
the precious diamond was not known in Europe until after the 
conquests of Alexander the Great, nor rustling silks, whether 
Indian or Chinese, before the time of Julius Caesar. 1 Camphor 
[Sanskrit karpura, Arabic kapur^ was certainly unknown before 
the time of Aetius of Diarbekir, A.D. 545 ; who is the first to unequi- 
vocally name musk [/xoo-^o?, in Sanskrit muska and also madalaka] . 
He also first names galangal, again named by Ibn Khurdabah 
A.D. 869-85; and zedoary, again named, with zerumbet, by 
Barbosa A.D. 1516, and Avicenna in 1563 ; and ambergris. 3 His 

1 Such statements seem incredible in these days ; but again the very first mention 
of Chinese tea [sah} is in the Ancient Accounts of India and China [Englished from the 
French translation of Eusebius Renaudot, and published by Sam. Harding at the Bible 
and Anchor, on the Pavement in St. Martin's Lane, 1733] written by the Mahomedans 
who travelled in those countries in the ninth century ; and it is not again mentioned 
until by Ramusio about 1545 ; while the first mention of Chinese porcelain is not 
until late in the thirteenth century, from which date, however, it is in continuous 
evidence. 

2 The trees yielding it may be the Kapiriov of Ctesias in the fifth century B.C. 

3 The etymology of ambergris and amber [jJXtKrpov and "succinum" of the 
Greeks and Romans] is unusually interesting. Amber is a fossil resin found chiefly on 
the Prussian coast of the Baltic ; but also on the shores of several islands of the Indian 



xxxvi INTRODUCTION. 

" nuces Indicze " may be nutmegs, but they, and cubebs, by 
some thought to be the pvpTiSavov of Hippocrates [circa B.C. 
450] are first unequivocally named by Masudi of Bagdad A.D. 
915-20. Cardamoms may be referred to under the a^w^ov 
and KapMpwpov of Theophrastus, Pliny, Dioscorides, and Aetius, 
but they are first distinctly identified by Edrisi, A.D. 1099-1186, who 
is also the first to distinguish mace, 1 the outer shell of the nutmeg, 
from the kernel itself. It was the Arab traders who introduced 
bezoar 2 [Persian pad-zehr, " chasse-poison," "antidote"] and civet 
[Arabic zibad, Mahratti javad, Tamil and Malayan kasturi? the 
Kaa-Topiov of Dioscorides and Galen] into the West in the eighth 
and ninth, and Indian senna in the ninth and tenth, cassia 
fistula in the thirteenth, sappan wood in the fourteenth, and 
cocculus indica, 4 nux vomica, and borax or tincal in the six- 
teenth centuries A.D. They also carried the orange [Sanskrit 
narunga] of Gurwhal, Sikkim, and Khasia, and the lemon 
[Sanskrit nimbuka, Hindi nimbu and limbu, Arabic limun] of 
Sikkim and Kumaon into Syria, whence the Crusaders helped to 
gradually propagate them throughout Southern Europe ; and 
they were apparently the first to trade in gum-benjamin [Arabic 

Archipelago, and along the East Coast of Africa, whence it was at one time exported 
in considerable quantity to the countries of the Mediterranean Sea by the Arabs 
through the mediaeval emporium of Aden. Ambergris is a morbid excrement of the 
spermaceti whale [Physeter macrocephalus] found floating on the sea along the coasts of 
India and Africa. The Arabs call it anbar [they call amber nikitriun, i.e. electron !], 
and Aetius refers to it as "ambar, which we have first nominated oriental succinum." 
After this succinum having been for a time distinguished as yellow amber [i.e. yellow 
ambergris] gradually became known as amber par excellence, and then true amber had 
to be discriminated as grey amber or amber^m. See note i, page Ixviii. 

1 It has nothing to do with the " macer " of Pliny, and fidictp of Dioscorides, which 
was the bark of an Indian tree. 

2 Bezoar is now almost any lithoid intestinal concretion, such as camel bezoar, 
horse bezoar, ox and cow bezoars, ibex bezoar [greenish and resinous] and pig bezoar 
["Lapis porci Ceylanici," "Lapis Malaccensis "]. There is even a monkey and a 
dog bezoar. But the true bezoar is obtained in India and Persia only from the goat. 

African civet is yielded by Viverra Civetta, and East Indian by V. Zibetha, and it 
is the Malayan name of this perfume, in its Latinised form, which is given to Castor 
fiber, the North American beaver, the source of castoreum. Both civet and castoreum 
closely resemble musk, yielded by the musk deer [Moschus Moschiferus] of the Hima- 
layan mountains, and now generally known to the Hindus by the name of hasturi, 
and to the Malays by that of jabat, i.e. " civet." 

4 It may possibly be referred to by the dirdpov XOTTOVQ t%ov of Strabo. 



INTRODUCTION. xxxvii 

luban-Javi, i.e. " Olibanum of Java"], the earliest undoubted 
reference to which occurs in the travels of Ibn Batuta, A.D. 1325- 
49. It may possibly have been included in the classical styrax, 
now almost wholly superseded in the Old World by rose-malloes 
[Malayan rasamalla] , the sweet balsam of the Liquidambar A Itingia 
of Java. Our knowledge of the Indian soap nut we owe to the 
Dutch; who were also the first to introduce a sample of gamboge 
into the West, although the first to offer it for public sale in Europe 
as "a drugge unknown here" were the London East India 
Company. 1 Catechu [cutch] , although named by Barbosa in 1514, 
and by Garcia d'Orta in 1564, was first regularly imported into 
Europe by the Company in the seventeenth century. Gambir, a 
similar product to catechu, does not appear among the imports 
of the Company [now the United East India Company] until 
the beginning of the nineteenth century. " East Indian kino " 
[Hindi kini\ was first prepared by the Company at a plantation 
near Tellicherry, on the Malabar Coast, and thence exported to 
Europe about 1844. The trade in jute fibre from Bengal com- 
menced about 1828, but it was not until the Crimean War that 
the exportation of it gradually rose from 364 cwts. in 1828 and 
275,578 cwts. in 1853 to 11,985,967 cwts. in 1891 ; or, as expressed 
in value, from Rs. 620 in 1828 to Rs. 100,839,720 in 1891. Gutta 
percha, prepared from the sap of Isonandra Gutta in Farther India, 
was first brought to the notice of Europe by Drs. Montgomery 
and Almeida at a meeting of the Society of Arts [John Street, 
Adelphi, London] in 1843, 

The first great impulse given to the trade between the East 
and West was when Pharaoh Psammetichus I., about B.C. 671-617, 
threw Egypt, and Nebuchadnezzar III., 2 about B.C. 605-562, threw 
Babylonia freely open to it ; and from that time forward, for 
nearly two thousand years, it grew and prospered marvellously. 

1 See the Court Minutes of i3th Oct., 1615. 

2 The Assyrian King Sennacherib, B.C. 705-681, built sea-going ships, manned by 
Phoenicians from Tyre, for the purpose of trading, in competition with the Sabasan 
Arabians, directly with India ; but Nebuchadnezzar the Great made the Mesopotamian 
trade with India, by way of the Persian Gulf, absolutely free, as Psammetichus I. had 
previously done for the Egyptian trade with India by way of the Red Sea ; and in both 
cases it was at once appropriated by the Arabians, in whose monopoly it remained 
down to the apparition of the Portuguese in the Indian Ocean. 



xxxviii INTRODUCTION. 

So intimate did it at last become that a temporary revolution was 
wrought by it in the religious life of India, where the system of 
materialistic atheism, known as Buddhism, became the predomi- 
nant moral philosophy of the Hindus, until, as a direct consequence 
of the Mahomedan conquests of Asia Minor, Persia, and India, the 
overland communications established by Psammetichus I. and 
Nebuchadnezzar the Great were broken up, and the indigenous 
Brahmanism again became triumphant throughout India. 
Similarly Judaism under the humanising influences of this 
international intercourse became modified, as Christianity in 
Europe, and, later, as Mahomedanism in northern Africa and 
Anterior Asia. It was through this trade also that the historical 
nations of the Old World received their common alphabet, and 
current coinages. The Phoenicians carried the alphabet, originally 
derived from Egypt, all over Europe ; while the Sabsean Arabs 
carried the same alphabet, as modified by themselves, into India, 
and all the countries of the Indian Ocean. And we may observe 
the civilising effects of this continuous overland trade, of nearly 
two milleniums, between the East and West, not only in the 
essential unity of the religions, alphabets, and coinages of modern 
Europe and Anterior Asia, but also in so trivial a circumstance as 
the use of saffron in the confectionery, and other cookery, of all 
the maritime people of the Old World from the coasts of Cornwall 
to the Coromandel Coast of India. 

The first systematic review of this trade is given in the Periplus 
of the Erythrean Sea [i.e. Indian Ocean] attributed to the historian 
Arrian, who lived from A.D. 90 to about A.D. 180, and obviously 
founded on documents dating back to at least the time of 
Alexander the Great, B.C. 356-323. Confirmed as it is by 
the statements to be found in the Universal Christian Topography 
of Cosmas Indicopleustes, who traded in the Indian Ocean 
between A.D. 530 and 550, it may be relied on as an authentic 
account of the ancient commerce between the East and West 
as it existed at the height of its activity from about 500 B.C. to 500 
A.D., the millenium of the supremacy of Buddhism in India. It 
gives the imports and exports of every emporium in the Indian 
Ocean from Adulis, corresponding with the modern Massouah, 
the port of Abyssinia, to Masalia, the modern Masulipatam, on 



INTRODUCTION. xxxix 

the Coromandel Coast of India. I will only quote the Indian 
productions named. These are, among the imports of Adulis, 
" agate cups/' " Indian iron," " plain and broad Indian cottons," 
"cotton for stuffing couches," "coverlids," "mallow-coloured 
cottons," "Indian muslins," and "gum-lac" \\aKKos ^w^amvo^\ ; l 
at Abalites, Malao, and Mondus, places in the modern bay of 
Zeyla, "cloths of various sorts," "tunics" [^rrwye?], "corn," 
"tin," "iron," "gold" and "silver," "cassia," "cinnamon," 
" gum-cancamum " [decamali of Western India] and pdiceLp ; at 
Mosullon, or Berbera, " iron " ; at Tabai, south of Cape Guardafui 
[i.e. "Aromata Promontorium "] , "cassia" and "cinnamon"; at 
Opone, south of Tabai, "corn," "rice," ftovrvpov [i.e. phi, the 
clarified butter of India], "oil of sesamum" [e\aiov <rri<japivov\, 
"cotton in the flock and in the web," "sashes for girdles and 
turbans," and "sugar"; at Moosa, the modern Mocha, "purple 
cloth," " brocaded and made-up clothes," " cloaks," " muslins," 
"quilts," "sashes," "saffron," and KVTrepos [? "turmeric"]; at 
Kane, the modern Maculla, "cloths," "corn," "tin," o-rupaf 
[? rose-malloes or else gum-benjamin], "specie"; and at Omana, 
some port of Baluchistan, "teak" [%v\wv <raya\lva)v~] , "ebony" 
[(f>a\dyyayv eftevivcov^, and " blackwood " [<f)a\.dyycov cr^cra/uWi'] , 
"purple" and other "cloths," and "gold." Among the exports from 
India are named, at Barbarike, corresponding with the modern 
Karachi, "costus," "bdellium," \VKIOV [rusut], "spikenard," 
"indigo," "silk," "cotton cloths," "furs from northern China" 
[via Thibet and Nipal] , "jade " [Xt#o? /eaXXaa/o?] , and " sapphires " ; 
at Barugaza, the modern Baraoch, " onyx stones," " agate cups," 
" Indian muslins," " muslins dyed of a mallow colour," " a large 
quantity of ordinary cotton cloths," "silks," "silk thread," 
"spikenard," "costus," and "bdellium," \VKLOV [rusuf], "long 
pepper," and "ivory"; at Barake, near Musiris, the modern Man- 
galore, "pepper in great quantity," "pearls," "ivory," "fine silks," 
"spikenard," "betel," " all sorts of gems," "diamonds" [aSa^a?], 

1 That is "stick lac," or lac with the dyeing matter, "lake" [the female Coccus 
Lacca], still retained in it. When the lake is washed out, the purely resinous residuum 
is "seed lac"; and this melted into masses is "lump lac," and, run into layers, "shell 
lac." Both these forms of gum-lac were probably included under the rjXtKrpov 
[amber] of the later Greek writers. Lacquer is a varnish of lac. See note, page 
xlvi., cochineal ; and page 39 of my Report on the Old Records of the India Office [3rd Ed.]. 

d 






xl INTRODUCTION. 

"rubies" [ua/ai/0o?], and " tortoiseshell " [from the Maldives]; 
and at Masalia, or Masulipatam, " a great quantity of the finest 
muslins." The imports also at each of these Indian emporia 
include exports from other parts of the East Indies, as all 
sorts of Indian cottons, and clothing, and specie, gems, and 
aromatic gum resins at Barbarike, " brass" and " tin," " lead," 
"gems," "glass" and a-rvpaj;, et cetera, at Barugaza and at 
Barake. The imports from Egypt and Babylonia appear to have 
been chiefly of "gold and silver plate," "brass vessels," and 
"ornaments of brass for the legs," "arms and wrought armour," 
"graven images," "purple cloth," "sashes of gaily shot colours," 
and other " richly coloured and figured cloths," and " wine." The 
Indian sosni, or quilted coverlet, decorated with conventional 
representations of the lotus lily, probably takes its name from 
Susa, or Shushan [so called from shushan, or shushanah, "lily"], 
the capital of Elam, at the head of the Persian Gulf, whence it 
was originally exported to Barbarike, Barugaza, Barake, and 
Masalia. 

This is none other than the trade of the Iliad and Odyssey 
with the East in Carian " red stained ivories " and " ivory curiously 
carved," " glittering arms " and " armour," "-copper " and " silver 
vessels," and "parcel-gilt images of the gods," "radiant zones," 
" necklaces," " pendants " and " bracelets," " dazzling white " and 
" flowered veils," " richly embroidered vestments," and " saffron " 
and "purple mantles," and "purple robes intertissued with gold," 
"rich tapestries of inwoven gold," and "carpets stiff with gold," 
and wines and incense. It is, indeed, the trade of all antiquity in 

" Wrought gold and silver, gems, full many a bale 
Of scarlet cloth, and fine silk, fit to veil 
The perfect limbs of dreaded Goddesses ; 
Spices fresh gathered from the outland trees, 
And arms well wrought, and precious scarce known wine, 
And carven images well nigh divine." 1 

The New and Complete Guide to the East India Trade, published in 
1775 by Robert Stevens, a merchant of Bombay, to whom the 
students of the history of commerce will always be under the 

1 WILLIAM MORRIS, Life and Death of Jason, xiv., 731-36. 



INTRODUCTION. xli 

deepest obligations, conclusively demonstrates that this ancient 

trade in 

" Phoenician scarlet, spice, and Indian gold, 
Deep dyeing" earths, and woad, and cinnabar, 
Wrought arms and vessels, and all things that are 
Desired much by dwellers in all lands." 1 

continued essentially the same, in spite of the diversion of its 
route round the Cape of Good Hope, down to the last century, 
when the East India Company had attained to the plenitude 
of their commercial prosperity and power in India ; and to 
the close of their monopoly of the trade with India in 1813, 
and with China in 1833. Notwithstanding, also, the changes 
that are being effected by steam carriage and steam machinery 
in the economic conditions of the East, this trade, in all 
its traditionary particulars, and picturesque local associations, 
remains to the present day, in every polytechnical and com- 
mercial centre of India, such as Ahmedabad, Baraoch, or Bombay, 
the characteristic local trade of 

" The merchant town's fair market place, 

Where over many a changing face 

The pigeons of the temple flit, 

And still the outland merchants sit 

Like kings above their merchandise, 

Lying to foolish men and wise." 2 

It was to secure the monopoly of this vast and opulent com- 
merce that Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia and Persia each in turn sought 
to gain the political control of Judaea, Edom, and Phosnicia; that 
Alexander the Great, as the crown of all his conquests, founded 
Alexandria; that the Seleucidae founded Seleucia in succession 
to Babylon, and the Parthian Arsacidas Ctesiphon, the two towns 
forming the al-Modayn of the Persian Sassanidae ; and that the 
Saracen Arabs founded Bussora A.D. 675, and Baghdad A.D. 762, 
cities that rapidly rivalled the then still living fame of Nineveh 
and Babylon. During the supremacy of the Phoenicians, 
Greeks, Carthaginians, Romans, Byzantines, and Saracens in 
the Mediterranean Sea, they each in turn flourished on the 
trade with India; and as the Saracenic power declined, Genoa 

1 WILLIAM MORRIS, Life and Death of Jason, vi., 326-29. 

2 Ibid., xii., 369-74. 

dl 



xlii INTRODUCTION. 

and Venice became enriched by it ; and the Christian states 
of southern Europe all enjoyed such unbroken prosperity 
through it that at last the light of civilisation dawned upon 
the distant nations along the Rhine and the Danube, and 
on the Baltic Sea, and German Ocean. It was then that the 
Ottoman Turks began to enter on their career of devastation and 
anarchy ; in succession subjugating Asia Minor, Mesopotamia, 
Syria, and Egypt, and blocking up, one after the other, all the 
overland routes of the commerce between the East and the 
West. But the European people of the Mediterranean Sea, who 
had become dependent on the trade with the East, and without 
it could not provide for the cost of their high state of civilization 
and improved organization, at once began to seek out, round the 
continent of Africa, the sea way to India ; the tradition of 
which had been preserved in the countries of the Mediter- 
ranean from the time of the Carthaginians. The history of 
modern Europe really begins with the quest and invention of 
India in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries by the Portuguese ; 
and it continues to the present day to be influenced by the 
rivalry of the different powers of Europe for a share, or, if 
possible, the monopoly, of the commerce of the Indies. The 
so-called " Eastern Question," the solution of which has been 
the chief problem before the diplomatists of Europe for the last 
hundred years, is simply the expression of the more or less latent 
rivalry of the seven great powers of Europe for the unquestioned 
command of the great commerce of the East, centering, as its 
keystone, in India. Whether at Constantinople and Cairo, or 
Candahar and Cabul, or in China, it is simply the question of 
how to obtain the control of the trade, navigation, and commerce 
of the Indian Ocean, for the purpose of exchanging, on the most 
favoured terms, the manufactures of Europe against the spices, 
perfumes, dyes, tans, oils and oil seeds, fibres, drugs, cereal and 
pulse grains, and woods, and other tropical productions of India, 
Farther India, the Indian Archipelago, and China and East 
Africa. 

Da Gama's discovery changed the face of Europe from the 
Mediterranean Sea to the Atlantic Ocean ; bringing Portugal, 
Holland, and England successively into the forefront of the line 



INTRODUCTION. xliii 

of human advancement; and in the course of three hundred 
years made the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland 
the common emporium of the whole sea-borne merchandise 
of the world. The first English attempts to reach India were 
by the " North West Passage," and subsequently through Russia. 
The first Englishman who actually visited India was Thomas 
Stephens, of New College, Oxford, afterwards Rector of the 
Jesuits' College at Goa, whose letters to his father roused 
great enthusiasm in England for direct trade with India. But 
the papers of the St. Philip, a Portuguese vessel captured by 
Drake in 1587, afforded so much information as to the profits 
of the Indian trade, that they are considered to have at last 
fixed the determination of the English to establish direct 
communication with India. Then the destruction of "the 
Invincible Armada " in 1588 gave them great confidence in 
their own navy, and in their ability to cope with the Spanish and 
Portuguese on the high seas ; and from this date the merchants 
of London, like those of Holland, began to earnestly devise 
measures for supplanting the Portuguese in the Indian Ocean. 
The Dutch were later than the English in attempting to get to 
the East, but, owing to their long established indirect trade with 
India through Lisbon, they succeeded in getting there before us, 
and it was on their raising the price of Indian pepper against us, 
from 35 to 6s and 8s a pound, that a meeting was held in London 
at Founder's Hall, with the Lord Mayor, Sir Stephen Soame, 
in the chair, on the 22nd of September, 1599, when it was agreed 
to form the Association which, on the 3ist of December in the 
following year, was incorporated by Queen Elizabeth under the 
title of " The Governour & Company of the Merchants of London 
trading into the East Indies." They prosecuted their twelve 
" Separate Voyages," A.D. 1601-12, and the " Joint Stock 
Voyages," undertaken between 1613 and 1620, with such discretion, 
energy, and success, that at once the effect was felt on the 
now rapidly declining overland trade between the East and West ; 
and the latter year, 1620, is fixed in the history of commerce as 
the date when, through the general lowering in the prices of 
Indian commodities, the trade between India and Europe, 
by the old routes through the Red Sea and Egypt, and the 



xliv INTRODUCTION. 

Persian Gulf and Euphrates Valley, sank at last into irremedi- 
able decay. What of it surviv3d was very much monopolised by 
the French. Thus, in The Present State of Egypt, published by 
F. Vansleb in 1678, it is instructive to read of the port of 
Alexandria : " The Trade of the French Merchants of this City is 
the greatest that they have in all the Eastern Parts, for there is 
no place in Turkie where so many French ships come as into this 
Haven. From the beginning of the year 1672 to the month of 
June there were no less than nineteen French ships that came 
hither, and in the month of June I reckoned fourteen. This 
is a considerable number, but not to be compared to the number 
of Vessels that visited the Haven heretofore, for Monsieur 
Lucasole, that did the Office of Chancellor of the French nation, 
told me that he remembered there had been at A lexandria in one 
Year ninety-four French vessels." Vansleb gives the following 
list of the exports and imports of Egypt at this time. 

EXPORTS. 

Gums. Benjoin, bdellion, arabic, adragant [tragacanth] lack, 
turick [i.e. of Tor, a seaport of Arabia, near the Isthmus of Suez], 
myrrh of Ethiopia, frankincense in tears, and storax. 

Juices. Aloe cicotrin, aloe epatick, opium, indigo named 
Serquis [Sarkhej, near Ahmadabad, Western India, see footnote 2, 
page 287], indigo of Bagdat, indigo of Balluder [Valabhi, Balhara 
of Arabs, near Bhavanagar in Kathiawar, Western India, see 
footnote 4, page 287], cassanad, sugars in great loaves, sugar 
candy, sugar soltani, sorbet [sherbet] . 

Woods. Sandal, citron, turbit, ebene, brasil. 

Rinds. Cinamon of Conchi [i.e. Kanchi, now Conjeveram, in 
southern India], cinnamon of Malabari, cinnamon of Zeilani 
[Ceylon]. 

. Fruits and Seeds. Cassia [i.e. Cassia Fistula'], coco of Levant 
[kermes, also called, in the mediaeval trade of the Levant, 
cochineal], coriander, coffee, dates, mirabolans kebus [i.e. 
Chebulic, or of Cabul], mirabolans Balludri, mirabolans citrin, 
Jmtmegs, nuts to vomit [nux vomica], cardamoms, ben [nut of 
Moringa aptcra~], tamarinds, coloquinte, pepper, cloves. 

Herbs. Flax, flax or hemp of Menuf, flax or hemp of 



INTRODUCTION, xlv 

Squinanti, black flax, hemp of Fium, hemp of Forsett, hemp of 
Oleb [Aleppo] , hemp of the Besantins, sene [senna] . 

Flowers. Spikenard, saffron of Nambrosia, saffron of Said, 
cotton in mmo [? in pod] , cotton in thread, ordinary cotton. 

Roots. Hermodats [hermodactyl], sine [Radix Chinas 
("lignum sanctum"), i.e. of Smilax China], ginger, cretonart 
[zedoary, see footnote 2, page 200], rhubarb, salsepareille [root of 
Smilax officinalis and S. medico] . 

Teeth. Elephants. Wool. 

Feathers. Austrich of the first and second sort, of the tail, of 
the back, of the " sharp," of the wings. 

Fish. Green lizards, pearl shells, salt-fish. Mommies. 

Salts. Ammoniac, nitre, rock alum. 

Linen. Blue of Alexandria and Menuf, great blue of Inhab, 
little blue of Cairo, Alexandria and Col, painted, battanones, 
magrabines ["Westerns," i.e. for " Europe"], messaline [Mosuli, 
i.e. muslin, "messelawny " of other seventeenth century writers], 
lizarde, cambrasines [cambrics]. 

Stuffs. Of Cairo, Damietta, and Alexandria, girdles of 
Rosetta, ordinary girdles, fine handkerchiefs, ordinary handker- 
chiefs, still commoner ones. 

Bladders. Musk. 

Carpets. Fine and coarse. 

IMPORTS. 

Minerals. Agarick [native carbonate of lime], white arsenic, 
yellow arsenic, archifu [? litmus], orpirnent, antimony, quicksilver, 
vitriol, vermillion, cinabar, salsepareille [sal-prunella, i.e. nitre], 
fine cine [crude potash] . 

Flowers and Herbs. Nardum celticum, spikenard. 

Metals. Copper thread, beaten brass, white iron [tin] , steel of 
Venice, lead, pewter. 

Seeds. Cochenelle [i.e. kermes]. 

Paper. 

Silks. Satin of Florence. 

Clothes of London, of Bucioche [ ], of the Holy 

Bridge of Rome, of Holland fashion, scarlet caps of Marseilles, 
other caps, caps of perfect make. 






xlvi INTRODUCTION 

Corrals. Of Messina, Taraille, corrals wrought of Cairo, 
white tartre, red tartre of Brasil, rock alum. 1 

The establishment of the East India Company was, indeed, 
the first step in the extraordinary social and political development 
of England during the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries. It was the Company's possession of India, the tacit 
command its possession gives us of the trade with the East, that 
enabled us to successfully resist the European coalition organized 
against us at the beginning of the present century by Napoleon 
the Great; and the continued possession of India will be our 
chief stay in sustaining the manufacturing and mercantile 
preponderance of this country in the crushing commercial com- 
petition with which we have now everywhere to contend. As 
Lord Palmerston clearly foresaw, the opening of the Suez Canal 
has already seriously sapped our position of virtually exclusive 
proprietorship in the East. It has again thrown the East wide 
open to the countries of the Mediterranean Sea, and the normal 
increase of the trade of India, since this most glorious enterprise 
was accomplished, has been chiefly to their profit, our trade with that 
country having ever since remained nearly stationary. Whenever, 
also, the great powers of Europe shall have the courage of their 



1 The chief articles of exchange in the mediaeval trade between the East and the 
West were : aloes ; alum ; amber ; balm [Balsamodendron Opobalsamum and B. Gilea- 
dense] ; brazil wood ; camphor ; canella [cinnamom and cassia] ; cardamoms ; cassia 
[Cassia Fistula (Dryden's "cassie sweet to smell," a well known perfume, is distilled from 
the flowers of Acacia Farnesiana)] ; cloves ; cochineal [i.e. " kermes," the Arabic kirmij 
"insect," the KOKKOS /3a0tio} of Dioscorides, the female Coccos Ilicis found on the Quercus 
cocci/era or " Kermes Oak" of Asia Minor, and not the cochineal, afterwards imported 
from Mexico, which is the female Coccus Cacti, found on the Opuntia cochinilifera, the 
" Nepal " of Mexico] ; coral [the best being of Merz-el-Kharez near Cape Bon, and th 
second class of Messina, et cetera'} ; costus ; cotton ; frankincense ; galangal ; galls ; 
ginger ; glass of Venice, Hebron, Damascus and Irak-Arabi [compare the iraga of 
Spain] ; gold and silver thread [chiefly of Cyprus, Venice, Milan, Lucca, Genoa, and 
Paris] ; gum tragacauth ; gum-lac ; indigo ; ivory [chiefly from Africa] ; ladanum ; 
linen of Cyprus ; mace ; madder ; mastic ; mummy ; musk ; myrobalans ; pearls ; 
precious stones [(i) Egyptian emeralds, distinguished as bahri ("maritime") for 
the riverine rajahs and sultans of the Indian Ocean, and magrabi ("westerns") for the 
prelates and kings of Europe, (2) Persian turquoises and balas rubies, and (3) Indian 
diamonds, rubies (Ceylon), sapphires, topazes, cats-eyes, amethysts, garnets, et 
cetera] ; pepper ; long pepper ; rhubarb ; saffron ; scammony ; silk ; sugar ; textile fabrics 
[(i) "cloth of pall," i.e. velvet, of Venice, Pisa and Genoa, (2) baudekin, baldacchino, 
" cloth of tissue " or " cloth of gold " ! originally of Baldac, or Baghdad, and damask, 



INTRODUCTION. xlvii 

humanity and enforce orderly government on Turkey and Persia, 
such as we have established in India, a still larger proportion of the 
trade with the East Indies will return to its old overland routes, 
and by the Euphrates Valley, as well as the Suez Canal ; our only 
share in the profits of which will be derived from its accommoda- 
tion at such British possessions in the line of its transit, as 
Aden, Cyprus, Malta, and Gibraltar, and, haply, Egypt. While 
it went by the Cape of Good Hope, there was no difficulty in 
our overcoming any competition for it. We enjoyed a forward 
position of unique advantage on the direct line of the ocean 
highway to the East ; and in vain, therefore, did the Portuguese, 
the Dutch, and the French attempt to resist our supplanting them 
in the trade which has now been going by it for four hundred years. 
But in relation to the ancient overland thoroughfares between the 
East and the West, to which we are now rapidly reverting, most of 
the nations of Europe have the natural advantage of us. They 
are nearer to them than we are, and several of them are now 
simultaneously entering into competition with us for the com- 
merce which must in each succeeding year more and more 
follow these reviving routes. Russia not only extends in an 
unbroken expanse from the North Sea to the Pacific Ocean, but 

a richly diapered silk, originally of Damascus, (3) tartarium, tartaryn, ? or "cloth of 
Tars," a rich scarlet stuff, originally of Central Asia and China, (4) " zetani " 
(satin), originally of Zeytun in China, (5) camlet, originally of the white wool 
of the camels of North China, (6) siklaton (Persian saqlatun, Mahratti saklut, 
and English "scarlet") or cyclas, originally a gold brocade of Baghdad, 
Tauris, and Almiera, (7) camoca, i.e. kinkob (Persian kimkha) or gold brocade 
of Herat, Nishapur, Baghdad, Damascus, Beyrout, Alexandria and Famagosta, 
(8) sendal, or cendal, originally from India, see footnote 2, page xxvi. (9) samite, 
(10) taffeta of Tauris and Sultanieh, (n) fustian of Fostat, a suburb of Cairo, 
(12) buckram, originally from Bokhara, (13) cymars, scarfs of fine linen or lawn, 
" cloth of lake," in Florio, " zimarra " is "an irish rugge, or such course garment,'" (14) 
blatty, see page 79, or " purple," originally made at Tyre, and afterwards at Byzantium, 
but later the term was applied to any richly coloured, or wrought, stuff of any place 
of manufacture, (15) sarcenet, a slender silk, originally made by the Saracens in Spain, 
(16) gauze, a fine tiffany-like silk, or bombasin, originally of Gaza, (17) bordalisander, 
striped silks of Alexandria and Syria, and (18) carpets, always at this time of 
Persia] ; tutia [oxide of zinc] ; and zedoary. These were the principal items of the trade 
between the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian Ocean ; and the gryphons, basilisks, 
lions, peacocks and elephants, decorating the richer stuffs enumerated, and which were 
provided chiefly for the use of the Catholic Roman and schismatic Greek Churches, 
demonstrate, as clearly as their commercial denominations, their oriental origin. 



xlviii INTRODUCTION. 

is rapidly advancing into immediate contact with India, and 
stretching out eagerly across Persia to the Indian Ocean. Austria 
is becoming sensible of the value to her, as to all the Danubian 
States, of the old overland routes from the Black Sea, through 
Asia Minor, Armenia, and the Euphrates Valley, to the Persian 
Gulf. Germany and Holland, France and Belgium, and 
Greece and Italy are fully alive to the opportunity the Suez 
Canal has given their manufactures in anticipating our own 
in the free markets of India and the Indian Ocean. At 
every point, whether in Egypt, in Syria, in Mesopotamia, in 
Persia, or in Afghanistan, along all these primeval overland routes 
to the Indies our path is closed by rival manufacturing powers. 
We may be sure, also, that so soon as Turkestan has been 
completely brought under the dominion of Russia, the old caravan 
roads between Eastern Asia [Scythia trans-Imaum] and Persia and 
Central Europe will be reopened, and take off some portion, at least, 
of the trade with China, now almost entirely sea-borne. It was 
this overland trade with China which, down to the time of the 
disastrous Turkish conquests made Central Asia and Northern 
Persia rich and populous. 1 Already our carrying trade in the 
Mediterranean seems to be passing away from us. The demand 
for tonnage in Bombay for Liverpool by the Suez Canal is 
steadily decreasing; and, since the opening of the canal, 
Liverpool has ceased to be the great emporium of Europe for 
Indian cotton. The bulk of the Bombay crop now goes to Havre, 
Barcelona, Marseilles, Genoa, Trieste, and Odessa. The cotton, 
and other products exported from India to the Mediterranean, 

1 The Chinese, who, according to Professor Terrien de Lacouperie, appear to 
have received the first elements of their civilization from Chaldaea, through immi- 
grants from the south of the Caspian Sea, B.C. 2647-2282, repeatedly record the 
arrival among them, from B.C. 2205 downward, of overland trading parties from the 
West; and that this overland intercourse between Europe and "Far Cathay" was, 
until it was broken up by the Turks, safe, regular and intimate, is proved by the fact 
that a new coinage, of the type of that established in Lydia B.C. 750-700, was, in 
little over one hundred years, introduced into China. Persian coins also circulated 
in northern China down to the latest years of the Sassanian dynasty. On the other 
hand, the introduction of the Median quince tree [Citrus Medico} into southern China, 
by sea, B.C. 660, and the regular importation of Roman imperial coins into all the 
southern parts of China between A.D. 14 and 284, indicate the early and continuous 
extension to that country of the ancient trade between the East and West across 
the Indian Ocean. 



INTRODUCTION. xlix 

are still chiefly carried in English bottoms, though they are not 
consigned to English merchants ; but the time must come when 
they will be carried in French, Italian, Spanish, Greek, Austrian 
and Russian ships, loading at Karachi, Bombay and Calcutta. It is 
quite true that the increase of our trade with the United States of 
America has, leaving out of view the effects of the recent and 
probably temporary MacKinley tariff, more than compensated 
for the want of any increase in our Indian trade since the opening 
the Suez Canal, but it is not prudent to rely altogether on our 
trade with America, North or South. It is of barely more than a 
hundred years' growth, and affords therefore insufficient evidence 
for forecasting its future development ; whereas we have a 
history of four thousand years on which to base with some 
confidence any anticipation of the probable effects of the loss 
of the Indian trade on the United Kingdom. But apart from 
this consideration, India, and the countries it commercially 
commands, will always be the best market for British manufac- 
tures. Broadly speaking, the temperate countries of the world 
are more and more becoming dominant manufacturing powers, 
and the tropical countries mere agricultural territories, in direct 
industrial subjection, if not political subordination, to the tem- 
perate countries with which they are commercially linked. This 
is why the United States of America offer us no reasonable hope 
of any adequate extension of our future commerce with them; 1 
and why the development of our trade with India, and the 
countries of the Indian Ocean generally, in progressive propor- 

1 The future of the United States as a great self-contained, consolidated, empire, 
and not a merely magnified plantation, absolutely depends on their fostering their 
manufactures to the highest degree of perfection and productiveness, not only for 
their own consumption, but to command the trade with tropical North, Central, and 
South America, the control of which is as vital for the United States as is that of the 
trade with India to us. This is the true justification of the MacKinley tariff ; and it is 
the true explanation of the Chicago Exhibition, which is nothing more nor less than 
a prodigious appliance for advertising, and most successfully as will be found, the 
manufactures of the United States before the emotional people of tropical America, 
to the corresponding detriment of the United Kingdom and Germany. When their 
national manufactures have been firmly established, and the trade with tropical 
America secured, and there is a surplus of production to be disposed of elsewhere, it 
will be the proper time for the United States to adopt a policy of free trade ; and 
then the Old World, East and West, must beware, for with those who perish in that 
wasting competition it will be " Vae Victis," with a vengeance on't ! 



INTRODUCTION. 

tion to the need for employing our rapidly increasing popu- 
lation in profitable manufactures, is of the most vital consequence 
to us. Every manufacturing state in Europe is beginning to 
feel the necessity for securing the markets of the East for its 
manufactures ; and we in England are absolutely dependent on 
the freedom of those markets, not only for the maintenance of 
our industrial supremacy, but for the continuance of our very 
existence as an independent people. Large countries like France, 
Germany, and Russia, can be economically self-sustaining, 
but a small country like England can with difficulty 
support a rapidly increasing and energetic population, such 
as our own, except on imported food, for which it can pay 
profitably only by exporting its manufactures. We have warnings, 
in short, of every kind, historical, political, industrial, and social, 
that these islands are passing through a severe crisis in their fate. 
The time has evidently come when we can no longer neglect to 
make the best of every natural advantage we possess, and to 
diligently make up for every disadvantage with which we may be 
weighted. It is the sum of unobserved, unconsidered deficiencies 
and negligencies which brings about the deadliest forms of failure, 
and in these days of close international competition a serious 
catastrophe suffered by any one of the leading powers of the world 
could only with the greatest difficulty be retrieved, if at all. It is 
remarkable what a difference the slightest natural advantage 
makes in even the most artificial conditions of human society, and 
in the ordinary retail business of shopkeepers. In most northern 
cities every street has what those living in it call a " right side," 
and a "wrong side," the rents differing between the two sides so 
much as from 25 to 30 per cent. I have never met with anyone 
who could explain it, except that it had always been so. It will, 
however, be invariably found that the " right side " of the street 
is that on which the sun shines from the south and west, making 
a brighter show of the shop windows, and therefore attracting 
the greater number of people, and of casual buyers, to them. 
But every nation is a shop, and the oceans and the rivers are the 
high streets and the bye-ways of the nations; and when the 
busy traffic that always has subsisted, and always will subsist, 
between the East and the West went overland, the nations 



INTRODUCTION. li 

situated along the Euphrates, the Nile, and the Mediterranean, 
made the first, and the whole profit of it. Then after it was 
diverted round the Cape, the nations fronting the Atlantic, and 
particularly England, which fronts at once India, Europe, and 
America, monopolized it, while the Mediterranean nations had, 
as it were, to put up their shutters and retire from business for 
nearly three hundred years. And now that this trade is gradually 
returning to its original overland routes, our disadvantage in 
relation to them is at once beginning to be seen, and would be 
still more clearly seen but for our immense present dealings with 
the Americas. Nevertheless, the Eastern trade is the great trunk 
trade current of the Old World, and France, with her unique 
advantage of having a frontage on both the Mediterranean and 
the Atlantic, if she ever seriously enters into the trade with the 
East Indies, will compete with us on almost equal terms round 
the Cape of Good Hope, and on more than equal terms in the 
Mediterranean, where her recent acquisition of Tunis, the corner- 
stone of her Algerian shop frontage, and the modern representa- 
tive of Carthage, gives her a commanding commercial position 
throughout northern Africa : to be neutralized only by our 
exercising a perpetual protectorate over Egypt. 

The greatest danger, however, threatening the future of 
these islands is that arising rather from the moral deterioration 
of our populations than any political weaknesses in our statesmen. 
Nothing short of some great physical convulsion can deprive 
them of the supreme advantage they enjoy of being placed at the 
very centre of the four continents of the globe, and across the 
direct track between the Americas and Northern Europe ; and 
also in their coal and iron mines. The happy qualities of the 
dominant Norman and Anglo-Saxon races, especially their 
energy, steadfastness, and integrity, are also advantages on our 
side not to be despised. We may be tolerably sure, therefore, 
that we are, after all, very much the masters of our own destinies; 
and that, happen what will, honest and intelligent workmanship 
will always preserve for us the command of the markets of the 
world. The first essential is the honesty to do whatsoever our 
hands find to do with all our will and might. If our manufacturers, 
and their factory hands, and our artisans generally, would only 



Hi INTRODUCTION. 

observe this rule in their relations with each other, and with their 
customers, and resolutely act on it, in spite of every temptation to 
ignore it, we might rely upon still being able to undersell every 
other country in all of our special manufactures, and with full 
profit both to the labour and the capital expended on them. It is 
certainly not the trade unions, nor the competition of foreigners, 
nor even the strikes,, that are really injuring British trade, but em- 
phatically the dishonesty of our manufacturers in wilfully supplying 
inferior goods and the dishonesty of our workmen in scamping 
both their work and time. After honesty, the second essential is 
intelligence, if indeed it is not the first ; for dishonesty is nearly 
always the result of the want of intelligence. Respectable and 
trustworthy Englishmen have always had a good reputation 
among manufacturers on the Continent, but as workmen only. 
As men of business, and for general usefulness or superintendence, 
they are far inferior to the Germans, Austrians, French, and even 
the Swiss. These defects, which are not inherent but rather the 
results of defective popular education and culture, we must over- 
come, if, with the rise of temperate, honest, cautious, thrifty, 
laborious, and informed industrial and artistic populations in 
France, Austria, Germany and Italy, we are still to retain our 
traditional pre-eminence as manufacturers. As the more bar- 
barous tribes of the tropics begin, with the prosperity their 
export trade in food stuffs and the raw materials for manufacture 
required by Europe and the United States of America is bringing 
them, to feel the desire to be provided with the comforts and 
appliances of a more civilized life, an almost limitless market will be 
gradually opened up in Africa,, and throughout all the countries round 
the Indian Ocean, for European manufacturers. It is at present 
virtually our own, and our future command of it is endangered 
not so much by any political catastrophe that may befall us in the 
immediate future, as by the inartistic character, and too often 
inferior quality, of our manufactures, as compared with those of the 
continental Europe and the United States of America. The semi- 
savage, and the barbarous populations of Africa and the Indian 
Archipelago, possess, in common, at once a keen determination to 
have full worth for their money, and an instinctive taste for 
ornament, particularly that of bright, but harmonious colouring, 



INTRODUCTION. liii 

such as is found in the textile fabrics of India. In short, what they 
want are the enduring and brilliantly dyed goods still made 
in India and Persia, but which these countries will never be 
able to supply beyond their own wants, and the limited demand 
for them by cultivated persons in Europe and America. We 
can never supplant the sumptuary handicrafts of India. The 
demand for them in India, and elsewhere, can only be supplied 
by India, and any attempt to compete with the native pro- 
duction of them with machine-made imitations can only end 
in unqualified failure. But as the modern European type of 
civilization extends along the coasts of Africa, and among 
all the islands of the Indian Archipelago, and, as unhappily 
it may, into ancient India, an insatiable demand will gradually 
spring up for ordinary dyed calicoes, and silks, and woollens, 
which only machinery will ever be able to adequately supply. 
That market we may legitimately claim for our own; and 
our future commercial and political position in the world 
entirely depends on our securing it ; while what is principally 
required to make it and keep it ours is that the cotton, woollen, 
and silken stuffs we provide for it should be of full measure, 
durable, free from sizeing, which is an abomination to all Hindus, 
and coloured with fast natural dyes. And a people cannot deter- 
minately give themselves up to manufacturing piece goods which 
fade in the sun, and stream with size in the rain, and to fabricating 
"shoddy" cloth, and " Brummagem " hardwares, without running 
the risk of gradually becoming dishonest and false in all the 
undertakings and institutions that constitute their national life, 
and individually, also, rotten to the core. The arts are the final 
expression of the whole moral and material condition of a people. 
Judged, then, by our art manufactures, what is the forecast we 
may form of the commercial and political future of the people 
of this country? That these considerations are at last being 
widely appreciated by our manufacturers is indicated by the 
growing attention given by them in recent years to the industrial 
arts of India. Once before, in the middle of the last century, 
the study of them, in connection with the trade, then at its 
zenith, of the East India Company, gave the stimulus to our 
manufactures in which their present extraordinary development 



liv INTRODUCTION. 

originated ; and there is every hope of the renewed interest 
in them at the present time having as beneficial an effect in 
reviving the artistic excellence, and, perhaps, in still further 
promoting the productiveness, of our national manufactures. 

The entries in the present volume, at pages 255, 337, 340, 406, 
and 410, of opium are among the earliest notices of the modern 
commerce in this drug with India ; and it will probably come as a 
surprise on some of my readers to find that there is no mention in 
the history of the ancient trade between the East and West of a 
product now so intimately associated, as a universal dietetic indul- 
gence, with the health and pleasure of the people of the Indian 
Archipelago and China, and so important, as the source of a practi- 
cally illimitable external revenue, to the prosperity and contentment 
of the people of India. There is, however, nothing exceptional in 
this significant circumstance when we remember that the habitual 
use of tea, coffee and tobacco has been similarly spread, within the 
last four hundred years, from China, Arabia and America, respec- 
tively, over the whole civilized world, and simply owing to their 
satisfying a natural craving of the human appetite ; this also being 
the explanation of the extraordinary development of opium eating, 
drinking, and smoking throughout southern and eastern Asia, 
immediately after the introduction of the drug, by the Mahomedan 
Arabs, from the countries of the Mediterranean Sea into those of 
the Indian Ocean. It has always been accepted that the word 
opium is the Greek word OTTIOV, the diminutive of OTTO?, juice [as 
in oTToftdXa-a/jLov, the juice (balm) of the balsam trees], and there 
is not a Western or Eastern name for opium that is not a variant 
of this Greek word OTTLOV. It has, indeed, been suggested that 
the Sanskrit word ahipana, or apana, is an indigenous, and the 
original Indian name for opium ; and inasmuch as Pliny mentions 
[xx., 76-80] a spurious opium-yielding poppy, called aphron 
["foam," as in Aphrodite], that the Greek word opium may 
have been formed from the Sanskrit ahipana, and, in ignorance 
of its true etymology, fathered on OTTO?. But the word 
ahipana does not occur anywhere until it appears in a Sanskrit 
dictionary published at Calcutta about seventy years ago ; 
and obviously it is the Sanskritized Arabic variant of OTTLOV, 
namely, afiun. The Greeks and Romans knew poppies 



INTRODUCTION. lv 

, Homer's " Iliad," viii., 306], and opiate preparations from 
poppies [fjLrjtccbviov, Hippocrates, B.C. 407-39], from the earliest 
ages of their history, and the ^dpfiaKov Wfirevdes, the praises 
of which, as a " grief-assuaging drug," are so rapturously 
sung in the Odyssey [iv., 220-1], was probably the primitive 
form of the Egyptian true opium [" opium Thebaicum "] of a 
later date. But it is very doubtful whether the first poppy known 
to them was the Papaver somniferum, from which alone true opium 
has ever been prepared ; and it is more probable that the original 
opiate poppy, and the original opiate poppies everywhere, were 
certain species of red poppy, resembling P. Rhczas, which, from 
East to West, dye in blood red the midsummer plains of middle 
Asia and Europe. I believe one of these red poppies of middle 
Asia to be the original source of some primitive indigenous 
opiate preparation in China and India, as distinguished from the 
true opium introduced into these countries from Egypt, and Asia 
Minor, and Persia, through the intermediation of the Mahomedan 
Arabs, trading in the Indian Ocean during the seventh, eighth, 
and ninth centuries. The earliest form of opium expressly 
described by any Western writer is the firj/ccoviov of Theo- 
phrastus [ix., 8, 2], which was an inspissated extract of the whole 
plant; and it is clear from Pliny that this " meconium," and 
similar opiate extracts, were made from a red poppy, as a 
spurious opium still is in the Himalayas and in China, as well 
as from the true opium poppy, P. somniferum, with which the 
Romans had already become acquainted when Pliny wrote 
[A.D. 24-79], Dioscorides [A.D. 77] is the first to distinguish 
the true opium prepared from the iccbSeia, or capsule of P. somni- 
ferum, from meconium, and down to the fifteenth century A.D. 
" meconium " was always distinguished from true opium, the 
" opium Thebaicum " of the time ; and the difference between 
them was discriminated by the Abbe Raynal so late as 1770. The 
earliest Western notice of Indian opium is in the letter of 
Giovanni da Empoli in the Archivo Storico Italiano of 1511, in 
which he mentions the capture of " 8 Guzzarate ships " laden with 
" arfiun," " for so they call opio thebaico," and other merchandise, 
worth 300,000 ducats. Barbosa, in 1516, states that the Chinese 
junks, on their return voyages from the Indian Archipelago, loaded 

e 



Ivi INTRODUCTION. 

at Malacca with " much anfiam, which we call opium," from 
Cambay, and, also, that it was imported into Calicut from both 
Cambay and Aden. Pyres, in his letter, written from Cochin, 
to King Emanuel of Portugal, in 1516, enumerates the opium 
of Egypt, and Cambay, and Cous [i.e. Kuch Bahar] in Bengal, 
adding " that the kings and lords eat of it, and even the common 
people." Garcia ab Horto, in 1563, explains that the " amfiao of 
Cambaia comes for the most part from one territory called Malvi " 
[Malwa]. Linschoten, in 1598, informs us that "amfion, so-called 
by the Portingales, is by the Arabians, Mores, and Indians, called 
Affion, in Latin opio, or opium," and that " it cometh out of Cairo 
in Egypt, and out of Aden . . . but most part out of Cambaia, 
and from Deccan." John Chamberlain and Richard Hakluyt, in 
the reports furnished by them, in 1599, for the guidance of the 
London East India Company, both include opium among the rich 
merchandise of the East Indies. Tavernier, in 1676, writes : 
" Opium comes from Burhanpur . . . between Surat and Agra. 
The Dutch go there and exchange their pepper for it." Schewitzer, 
between 1675 and 1683, records the slaughter of "the flower of 
of our [Dutch] officers and 150 private soldiers " by a party of 
Javanese under the influence of opium, and the assassination of 
a Dutch sentinel at Batavia by Javanese under the same excite- 
ment. Kaempfer, in 1688, remarks that the Javanese imported 
their opium from Bengal and the Coromandel Coast of India, 
and used it mixed with tobacco. Thomas Woolley, writing 
from Vizagapatam to the United East India Company in 1711, 
enlarges on the prophylactic uses of opium to the vegetarian 
people of India. 1 In the same year Lockyer tells us that the 
price of opium at Calicut was " 160 fanhams per candy," and 
the Emperor of China's customs on opium from " i mace 
to 3 tales per pecul." Valentijn, in 1726, observes "that 
Java alone consumes monthly 350 packs of opium, each 
being 136 catis, though the [Dutch] East India Company 
make 145 catis of it." In the same year Hamilton notes : 
" The chiefs of Calecut for many years have vended between 
500 and 1000 chests of Bengal ophium yearly up in the inland 

1 His letter was published, from the India Office records, in the Times of July 
1886. 



INTRODUCTION. Ivii 

countries, where it is much used." The Abbe" Raynal, in 
1770, indignantly protests that the most considerable branch of 
the commerce of Bengal was in the manufacture and export 
of opium; that it was prepared both in the form of opium 
and meconium, and mostly in Bahar ; and that " an excessive 
fondness for opium prevails in all the countries to the East of 
India." He continues : " In vain have the laws of China 
condemned to the flames every vessel that imports, and every 
house that receives it ; the consumption is not the less consider- 
able. It is still greater at Malacca, Borneo, the Moluccas, Java, 
Macassar, Sumatra, and all the islands of this immense Archi- 
pelago." In connection with the reference made by Raynal to 
" meconium," it is interesting to note that Robert Stevens [of 
Bombay], in 1775, describes opium as "produced in Bengal, 
about Patna, being made of Poppy- Leaves," and that Hove, who 
was in Bombay about the same period [1787], says that opium 
was then extracted from the stalks of the Papaver somniferum; 
and that the Mogols " chew opium constantly," and " make it 
their common beverage." These quotations sufficiently dispose 
of the familiar allegation, meant by those who advance it to be 
opprobious to the British administration of India, that the opium 
trade of India was first established by Warren Hastings, the 
Governor General of Fort William from October 20th, 1774 
to February 8th, 1785. The fact is that the state monopoly 
of opium in India was organized throughout Hindustan and 
Central India [Malwa, et cetera] by the Mo[n]gol Emperors of 
Delhi, from whom we inherited it as one of their sources of 
revenue. The Board of Supervisors, sent out to India in 1769, 
received instructions to encourage the export of yarn, silk, and 
opium ; but owing to the ship they sailed in foundering at sea, 
it was not until 1773 that the United East India Company 
undertook the supervision of the opium monopoly in Bengal and 
Behar; and their first regular exports of the drug were not 
commenced before 1796. In the following year they restricted 
the cultivation of the poppy to Behar and Benares, and dis- 
continued it in Bengal. 

The Chinese knew the poppy plant before the eighth century 
A.D. ; and Dr. Edkins, in his scholarly and exhaustive Historical 

e i 



Iviii INTRODUCTION. 

Note on the Poppy in China, expresses the opinion that it was 
probably introduced with the rose, jasmine, and henna tree, by 
the Arabians, about the date of the death, A.D. 632, of the 
Prophet Mahomed, whose uncle died not long afterwards in 
China. Notwithstanding Dr. Edkins's high authority as a 
Sinologist, I believe that either the true P. somniferum, or some 
closely allied opiate Papaver, has been immemorially known to 
the Chinese ; but be this as it may, all agree that about the 
ninth century A.D. the true opium poppy was cultivated in 
Szechuen, the eastmost province of the Chinese Empire. In 
the eleventh century A.D. it is noted as " found everywhere," and 
its narcotic properties are recognized as having been known by 
the thirteenth century. During the fifteenth, sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries, the Chinese trade with eastern and southern 
India was as active as that of the Mahomedan Arabs and the 
Portuguese throughout the Indian Ocean ; and Barbosa's state- 
ment, in 1516, that the Chinese junks, on their return to Canton 
and Amoy, always loaded at Malacca with Cambay opium has 
already been quoted. Moreover, it is now known that the 
Chinese had begun to manufacture opium for themselves for at 
least a century before Barbosa was, with his cousin Magellan, at 
the siege of Malacca ; and that, in 1523, official instructions were 
issued for the more careful preparation of opium in China, which 
was, in 1589, protected by a duty placed on imported opium. 
Opium smoking Dr. Edkins considers to have been introduced 
into China with tobacco smoking, about the beginning of the 
seventeenth century. I would venture to conjecturally associate 
the introduction of this absolutely harmless use of opium with 
the smoking of hemp by the Scythian races of Central Asia from 
the most primitive times of their history. Still the fact remains 
that it was not until the seventeenth century, and almost con- 
temporaneously with our own royal Counterblast against Tobacco, 
that the last of the Ming Emperors issued his famous edicts 
against tobacco 1 and opium smoking. His pietistic efforts, how- 

1 At this time the tobacco and opium were mixed together with arsenic for 
smoking, as is still done in Java, and elsewhere in the Indian Archipelago, forming 
a preparation altogether distinct from "the smokeable extract" of opium now used 
in China and Western India. 



INTRODUCTION. lix 

ever, had no effect on a practice that had now become, and has 
ever since remained, one of the most characteristic national 
habits of the Chinese. Fresh edicts were issued against the 
practice in 1790, and the importation of the foreign drug was 
altogether forbidden in 1800. But, as the Abbe Raynal observed in 
1770, these measures never for a moment put down the practice of 
opium smoking, nor the cultivation of the opium poppy in China ; 1 
where, at the present time, nearly four times more opium is 
produced than is imported from abroad. In short, Indian opium 
is, as it always has been, the luxury of the rich in China, just 
as champagne is in Europe and America ; the only difference 
betwixt them being that, while the daily use of champagne, or 
other wines and spirits, malt liquors, et cetera, may prove 
deleterious, the smoking of the pure extract of Indian monopoly 
opium can, in itself, never be injurious to health, not even when 
indulged in, so far as the time and money wasted on it are 
concerned, to so-called " excess." 

As to the effects of the habitual eating or drinking of opium 
my personal testimony is this. During the fifteen years of my 
later residence in Western India, I paid the closest attention to 
the subject ; and I had every kind of experience in relation to it, 
having at different times been in medical charge of the Southern 
Mahratta Irregular Horse, the 8th Madras Cavalry, the 3rd 
Bombay Native Infantry, a Battery of Artillery, the jail and civil 
station of Sholapore, and the steam frigate Ajdaha. Subsequently 
I was attached, for the remainder of my service, to the Jamsetjee 
Jejeebhoy Hospital, and was in succession professor of Anatomy 
and Physiology, and of Botany and Materia Medica, at Grant 
Medical College. I was also a justice of the peace and visitor to 
the jails of Bombay, and the year I was sheriff I regularly visited 
the jails. Besides this, I was probably more intimately familiar 
with all classes of the native population of the city than any 

1 Nor, indeed, the importation, by smuggling, of Indian opium; out of which 
disorderly trading arose the so-stigmatized "Opium War" of 1841. But it was 
not any desire to force opium on the Chinese that brought on the war, but the 
wanton destruction, by the Chinese Commissioner Lin, of two millions sterling 
worth of Indian opium, the property of British merchants, at the very time we were 
negotiating with his Government for the regulation of the trade in the drug with 
China. 



Ix INTRODUCTION. 

other European of my generation, while as an ever active 
journalist, I was mixed up in almost every discussion of this sort, 
during my time in Bombay. And, in all the experience, as here 
precisely detailed, and capable therefore of being checked at every 
point, I thus had of the indigenous life of Western India, I never 
once met with a single native suffering, or who ever had suffered, 
from the habitual use of opium ; and, excepting cases of 
accidental or wilful poisoning by opium, I never knew of a single 
instance of death from its use. I have, moreover, never yet 
met with anyone who, in his own experience, has known of a 
case of death, or of injury to health, from the habitual eating 
or drinking of opium, as practised by the people of any part of 
India proper. So far as I can remember, in the printed tables 
used in Indian civil and military hospitals, there is no standing 
column for the " opium habit" nor for " deaths from opium." 
On the strength of my personal experience therefore I should be 
prepared to defy anyone to bring forward from their personal 
experience a single authentic record of death, or shortened life, 
from habitual opium eating or drinking in India. If anyone can, 
let him ; for the means of verifying his or her statement, are 
always, within the current generation, accessible in India. On the 
contrary, so far as my experience goes, the healthiest populations 
of western India, are those distinguished for their, so stigmatized, 
excessive use of opium. I refer to the people of Gujerat generally, 
and more particularly to the people of the Kaira district, and also 
of the neighbouring district of Broach. This is true also, as is 
universally acknowledged, of the people of Rajputana and the 
Punjab. A good deal has recently been said in vague general 
terms of the evil effects of opium eating in increasing crime and 
insanity in Bengal; but Deputy Inspector- General Mouatt, one 
of the highest authorities on the criminal and medical statistics 
of India, has pointed out in reply, 1 that among the 302,374 native 
prisoners brought under his observation while Official Visitor of 
Lunatic Asylums and Inspector-General of Prisons, Bengal, in 
not a single case was the crime for which they had been con- 
demned, or any disease from which they suffered, due to opium ; 

1 See the Times of June i3th, and also, for Mr. F. Wyer's letter, of November 
i8tb, 1892. 



INTRODUCTION. hci 

and that of the countless number of lunatics inspected by him 
in the same period, in no case was their insanity attributable, 
so far as he remembered, to the use of this drug. Much, also, 
has been made of certain statements in Sir Charles Aitchison's 
" Report on the Use of Opium in Burmah" ; but in the appended 
" Note " Sir Charles Bernard states that neither in the gaols, nor 
in the opium shops, nor in the hospitals, nor in the streets, nor 
in the villages, save in Minbyin, did he come across actual 
tangible evidence of any ill effects of the prevailing opium habit. 
Again, in the Report on the Administration of the Northern Shan 
States for the year 1891-92, Mr. J. G. Scott, C.I.E., writes: "The 
absurdity of the clamour against opium cultivation, and opium 
smoking, is nowhere more conspicuous than in Ko Kang. Every- 
one in Ko Kang smokes opium habitually, and at all hours. 
Burma and the Shan country are free enough from weaklings 
and deformed persons [' the Saturday-nights children ' of this 
country], but in all Ko Kang, ... I saw none who were not 
creditable, and few who were not stalwart human beings ; they 
are athletic ; they will carry the heaviest loads up the longest 
ascents without a halt, if they have an opium pipe at the top ; 
they are energetic ; they will travel several days' journey to sell a 
few loads of produce, and to buy some petty lengths of cloth, and 
they smoke opium all the way ; they are intelligent and resourceful, 
as their methods of cultivation and their various farm devices 
show ; and they know when to stop short of excess even in opium. 
Their women are buxom, and faithful, and fruitful, and all smoke 
opium." 

As for opium smoking, I am satisfied, from my own experience 
of it, that it is as innocuous as smoking hay, straw, or stubble. It 
has not even the potency, although it has far more of the psychical 
charm, of the mildest tobacco smoking ; that is as judged by rny 
own use of it. I have, therefore, always presumed that the morphia 
in "the smokeable extract of opium " [chaudu] is all decom- 
posed in the flame of the lamp at which it is lighted before the 
smoke from it reaches the lungs. But, be this as it may, we find 
in China, as in India, that nowhere are the native populations so 
robust, industrious, and thriving, as in the principal opium pro- 
ducing and opium consuming provinces of the empire. It is 



xii INTRODUCTION. 

enough to refer on this point to the report by Mr. W. Donald 
Spence, our Acting-Consul at Ichang, published in the Parlia- 
mentary Paper, No. 3, of 1882, p. 35. 

Of course I know the in terrorem cases to be seen in the opium 
dens in Bombay, and elsewhere in the East. I well knew the 
Bombay den, and its keeper, and his customers, who were never 
more than a dozen at the most. But who were they ? The dregs 
of the lowest outcasts of the greatest emporium of trade in the Old 
World outside London, and the sink of all the roving vagabond- 
age of the Indian Ocean ; and as for the real causes of their 
sufferings, I will only here say that, so far as I could ever ascer- 
tain, they had nothing to do with the opium-pipe, which seemed 
to be only the last palliative of their "distempered torment," until 
they were enfranchised of it by death. I hold the recipe of the 
chaudu sold in the Colbhat den in Bombay, and it is difficult to 
understand how, when decomposed in the flame of the opium 
lamp, the stuff could have the slightest physiological consequences 
on its smokers, other than the hypnotic effect of the fascinating 
act of smoking. 

Opium, in brief, is one of the greatest gifts of Providence to 
the people of the tropics ; and not simply as a soothing adjuvant 
to the digestion of a vegetarian diet, such as that used by the 
Hindus, and a prophylactic against malaria, through its specific 
action on the perspiration, the only secretion it stimulates, but, 
above all, because its use, like that of tea, coffee and tobacco, 
anticipates and allays the natural thirst of mankind for alcoholic 
stimulants, which certainly cannot be safely indulged in by the 
emotional people of southern Asia and Africa, except with the 
greatest circumspection and carefulness. Opium, furthermore, 
is one of the most economical of stimulants. The English drink 
bill for 1891 was calculated by Mr. Dawson Burns, in the Times 
of February I7th, 1892, at 140,000,000. Sir John Hart calcu- 
lates the Chinese annual opium bill at 25,000,000 ; and were 
we in this country to substitute opium for wine and spirits, et 
cetera, our proportionate bill would be only 3,150,000, as against 
140,000,000. 

I am not entitled to discuss the administrative and econo- 
mical sides of the question ; but, surely, those who hold that 



INTRODUCTION. Ixiii 

the habitual use of opium is harmful, should be the last to 
object to the state monopoly of the drug in India. I, on the 
contrary, holding, that its habitual consumption is conducive 
to the health, wealth, and happiness of the inhabitants of the 
tropics, and more especially of those who are vegetarians, 
would freely throw the manufacture of it open to private enter- 
prise, and raise as high a duty on its export as it could with 
safety bear in the intertropical competition with ardent spirits 
to which this drug seems predestined. And within thirty years 
the whole imperial, provincial, and feudatory expenditure of India 
might, in this way, be met out of the yearly increasing opium 
revenue, while the country itself would be left practically untaxed. 1 
Before parting with the volume, I would offer some expla- 
nation of its ornamentation ; of which the most important 
feature is the Colophon. This device originally marked the 
last page of -a book, and contained the place and year of its 
publication, but was ultimately transferred, with these particulars, 
to the title page, where, chiefly through want of sufficient 
space, the Colophon gradually dwindled to a mere trade- 
mark, of the baldest, and, too often, most disfiguring kind. In 
the present volume it has been replaced in its proper position at 
the end of the book, its central geometrical elements only being 
repeated on the title page, and here in their consonant colours, 
on the very spot assigned in the highest usage to some personal 
badge, or to the arms, of the writer or editor of a work. 
Whoever may be the author of a book, its finisher is, after all, the 
much abused publisher, without whom it could not be brought to 
its fateful issue ; and as the word " Colophon " is derived from 
the circumstance of the cavalry of Colophon, one of the twelve 
cities of the Ionian league, having always been kept in reserve 

1 See also my letters in the Times of December 6th, 1881, and January aoth, 1882 ; 
Sir Rutherford Alcock's lecture on "The Opium Trade," in the Journal of the 
Society of Arts for January aoth, 1882; The Truth about Opium, by W. H. Brereton, 
1882, second edition, 1883 ; All about Opium, by H. H. Sultzberger, 1884 ; The Vindi- 
cation of England's Policy with regard to the Opium Trade, by C. R. Haines, 1884; Mr. 
George H. M. Batten's lecture on "The Opium Question" in the Journal of the 
Society of Arts for April ist, 1892; the article on Opium in the Dictionary of the Economic 
Products of India, by Dr. George Watt, C.I.E. ; and the Times articles on " Indian 
Affairs" of May 5th and August loth, 1891, and March 2ist and June i3th, 1892. 



Ixiv INTRODUCTION. 

by the allies to make the last charge and decide the battle 
[whence the Greek proverb, " He put the Colophon to it," rov 
KoXo<oW 7reSr)Kv~\ , it is doubly appropriate, in etymology 
as in ritual, that the publisher's distinctive device should be 
imprinted at large on, or opposite to, the last page of a book ; 
and that, proportionately to its use and significance, the 
utmost art should be lavished on its colophon, or "finishing 
touch." The printer and binder are also each entitled to their 
personal stamp, and should take a pride in contributing it, 
draughted by the best designers of their time, to the consecration 
of every book of good faith in the preparation of which they have 
had a helping hand. They are, for the most part, men of sub- 
stance, and can well afford to publicly prove in this reverential 
form that they not only know their trade, but love their art. In 
the present instance, Mr. George C. Haite, twelfth President of 
the brotherhood of " the Sette of Odd Volumes," founded by 
Mr. Bernard Quaritch in 1880, has taken the general plan and 
delineation of his design from the colophon of a <ati)0ltcon 
of the year 1497, in my possession ; developing its full signifi- 
cance by collating it with similar symbolical figures in Indian 
art; and adapting it to Mr. Quaritch's family history. The 
specific charm of Indian, as of all ancient Asiatic, art is 
that, whether in the vague amplitude of the metaphorical 
descriptions of the theologised astrology of the Revelation 
of St. John the Divine, or the definite epitome of such tradi- 
tionary decorative types as the "knop and flower pattern," and 
the "cone pattern," it is everywhere the conscious reflection 
of the whole universe of things seen and unseen, the sanctified 
cypher, as it were, of the visible creation of forces and pheno- 
mena, and of their invisible, inscrutable Creator, the one God of 
all human faith, and love, and adoration. Thus it has, from the 
earliest times, in the ultimate types of its poetical and pictorial 
imagery, portrayed the cosmos as a virgin mother, a suffering and 
redeeming god-man, a holy mountain, a four-square heavenly 
city, and a garden enclosed, with its Paradisaical tree planted by 
the four-parted waters of eternal life. 1 The first Paradise, and 

1 See the chapter on " The Knop and Flower Pattern " in my Handbook to the 
British Indian Section of the Paris Universal Exposition of 1878, and Industrial Arts of 



INTRODUCTION. Ixv 

the first Tree of Life, were of direct physiological origination 
[compare /crJTro? and " hortus "], and the most obvious exponents 
of the generative and reproductive principles of nature ; the second 
Paradise was geographical, and its characteristic tree was ever its 
worshipful Tree of Life, as the date palm in Chaldsea, and the 
ash tree of the Norse nations in "Asgard" [the country about 
the Sea of Azov] ; while the final, transcendental Paradise was the 
green earth itself, or, at least, its northern hemisphere, " the 
mountain of the Lord," rising above the 7 [or 9] hells of the 
southern hemisphere, and the final, consummate Tree of Life, 
the 7 [or 9] planets simulated as a date palm, or some other 
tree, deep-rooted in the earth, and carrying its 7- or g-branched 
head into the highest heavens, and guarded by the mystical 
cherubim [" the Two Witnesses "], all encircled, or ensquared, by 
the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and their twenty-four deacons, the 
"flammantia mcenia mundi." It may be said that nearly all the 
traditional devices in decorative design are derived from this 
sublime Chaldaean presentment of the Tree of Life ; and 
throughout their infinite permutations, they in Indian art retain, 
" void of all prophanation," their original sacramental significance, 
and still utter forth their hallowing voice of archaic praise : 
" Alleluia ! for the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth ! Alleluia ! 
Salvation, Glory, Honour, Power unto the Lord our God!" In 
the colophon designed for Mr. Quaritch, the earth is indicated by 
a circle divided through its horizontal diameter into the nether 
world of night and winter, destruction and death, and the upper 
world of day and summer, light and life and glory ; and the 
planetary tree by the Papal Cross, as the emblem of the historical 
continuity of the development of religious doctrine and ritual 
in the formulated Christianity of the Catholic Roman Church. 
The geometrical structure of the striking type thus obtained 
symbolizes the creative forces of nature with the ingenuousness 



India, 1881 ; my article on "The Christmas Tree" in the Asiatic Quarterly Review 
for January, 1882, and on " The Empire of the Hittites in the History of Art " in the 
Asiatic Quarterly Review for January, 1888; also my remarks on "The Breastplate of 
Aaron " in the Journal of the Society of Arts for March i8th, 1887 ; and my article on 
" The Collections of Indian Art in Marlborough House and at Sandringham Hall," 
in the Journal of Indian Art and Industry for October, 1891, and January, 1892. 



Ixvi INTRODUCTION. 

of the corresponding lingam-yoni symbol of the Hindus, and I 
have emphasized this in transferring a reduction of it to the 
title-page by colouring it red in its active and blue in its 
passive element. The zodiac is conventionally denoted by the 
oak sprays, bearing between them twelve acorns and twenty- 
four leaves ; and these sprays refer again to Mr. Quaritch 
personally. 

The head and tail pieces used throughout the reproduction of 
" the Register of Letters, &c.," and for the Index, and the Table 
of Contents, have been selected from the ordinary stock of the 
printers ; but those used for the Introduction are from pen and 
ink drawings by Mr. Foster ; the head-piece representing the 
arms of the London or " Old " East India Company, of the 
United or " New " Company, and of the United Kingdom, 
and the tail-piece the shield suggested by me for the Indian 
window designed by Mr. Clement Heaton for the Imperial 
Institute. It is a variant of the Hindu and Buddhistic 
astronomical amulet known as the nava-ratna or " nine gems," 
that is, counting the waxing, full, and waning moon as three, of 
the nine planets. "These 7 are the eyes of the Lord, which 
run to and fro through the whole earth:" 

The Moon whose "disposicion" 

" Upon the londe of Alemaigne 
Is set and eke upon Britaigne "; 

Mercury, whose " disposicion " 

" Is most in Borgone and in Fraunce "; 

Venus, 



The climate of whose lechery 
Is most comune in Lumbardy "; 



the Sun, who wherein 
Mars, who is 



Of all this erth he regneth most 
As for wisdom it is Grece ": 



' Upon the Haly Londe so cast, 
That there is no pees stedefast "; 



INTRODUCTION. Ixvii 

Jupiter, the " Prince of Peace," 

" And fortunate to marchandry "; 
wherefore, 

"In Egipte of his offices 
He regneth most in speciall, 
For there he lustes over al 
Of all that to this life befalleth "; 

and, lastly, Saturn, 

" His climate is in Orient," 
where 

" Of chapmenhode he found the wey, 
And eke to coigne the money 
Of sundry metal." 1 

It was half seriously asked some weeks ago, in a London 
evening journal, whether the destinies of the nations were indeed 
swayed by the stars ? The answer is not to be sought only in 
cosmical physics. It is because the Chaldseans worshipped, above 
all other gods, the Moon-God Sin, who gives his name to " the 
secret top " of Sinai, that to this day the principal currencies 
of southern and eastern Asia are of his sacred metal, silver ; 
and because the Phoenicians, and Assyro-Babylonians, and 
other Semitic nations of interior Asia, worshipped, as their 
supreme god, the Sun-God Baal-Samem, or Bel, that their 
currencies were further enriched by the introduction of his 
metal, gold ; 2 and few things have disturbed the commerce 

1 GOWER, Confessio Amantis. 

2 The six ingots of silver, found by Schliemann among the ruins of Hissarlik, go 
to prove that the light Chaldaeo-Hittite silver mina ["measure," i.e. "standard," 
compare "month," "moon," and Hindustani manA~\ of 8656 grs., "the mina 
of Karkemish," was already circulating in the Troad during the fifteenth 
century B.C. : and it was by this overland route that the silver shekel [172-9 
grs.] of Mesopotamia was at last carried across the Hellespont into Europe, 
and there originated, at a reduced standard [150 grs.], the silver stater 
["standard"] of Thrace. Similarly the light Assyro-Babylonian gold shekel or 
stater [130 grs.], carried into Greece from Samos, originated the Euboic silver 
stater [125 to 135 grs.], and later the Athenian and Corinthian silver staters. The 
^Eginetan stater [180 to 194 grs.] was derived from the old heavy silver mina 



Ixviii INTRODUCTION. 

between the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea, and the 
East and West generally, more than the fluctuations in the 
ratios of value between these two currencies. Nor have these 
perturbations ever been more felt, or with greater effect on the 
fate of empires than in the present day ; when silver is turned 
to dross, and gold to a rod for our backs, and the modern 
prophets of Deus Lunus and Deus Sol have none of them 
availed anything to set the old balance between the two metals 
true again. 

The vignette facing the Introduction is a presentment, com- 
piled from more or less reliable data, of the Red Dragon, pro- 
ceeding on one of her prosperous voyages into the East Indies, 

" With all her bravery on and tackle trim, 
Sails filled, and streamers waving. 
Courted by all the winds that held them play, 
An amber scent 1 of odorous perfume 
Her harbinger." 

[15,600 grs. divided into 60 shekels of 260 grs.] of Mesopotamia, as modified by 
the Phoenicians [11,500 grs. divided into 50 shekels of 230 grs.], and carried by them 
from Sidon and Tyre direct, by sea, to jEgina ; and the Macedonian [224 grs.] from the 
gold [and electrum] staters of Anterior Asia, carried by the Phoenicians from Miletus 
to the southern parts of Thrace. How early Indian gold entered into these coinages 
is shewn by the gryphon stamped on the gold staters of Panticapaeum, in the Tauric 
Chersonese, of the fourth century B.C. The output of gold became so enormous 
about this time that in Sicily its value, relatively to silver, fell from 15 to i circa B.C. 
375, to 12 to i circa B.C. 315. In Macedonia king Philip [B.C. 359-336] endeavoured 
by means of a bimetallic standard to keep up the silver value of gold, but it was all 
in vain ; and when Alexander the Great obtained possession of the treasury of Darius 
[B.C. 331], although he still continued the Macedonian gold currency, the coins in 
that metal were really reduced to the status of tokens. The Persian daric [daraga, "a 
degree," or sexagesimal unit, and compare dpaxftr), the word, in its Hebrew forms of 
adarkon and darkcmon, being translated " dram" in the authorized English version of 
Ezra viii. 27, ii. 69, &c.] was also, like the Euboic stater, derived from the shekel 
[130 grs.] or g5gth of the light Assyro-Babylonian mina [7800 grs.]; and this is the 
mina referred to in Daniel v. 25-28: "Mene, mene, tekel upharsin"', the correct 
translation of the passage being: "The mina (of this invoice) is the mina of 
the standard [tekel, compare 'talent,' 'Altas, 1 and the Hindustani tola] of the 
Parsis [or Persians]." But the exact interpretation of the obsolete cuneiform trade 
formula had been forgotten when " the Book of Daniel," which was really directed 
against Antiochus Epiphanes, under the mask of Nebuchadnezzar III., was written 
B.C. 171-168. 

1 MILTON, Samson Agonistes. " An amber scent " here has reference to ambergris. 
See note 3, page xxxv. 



INTRODUCTION. Ixix 

Mr. Haite has been hampered in his treatment of the subject by 
my insisting on his turning this illustration into a rebus, for the 
special amusement of the brotherhood of the Sette of Odd 
Volumes. If this has in any way detracted from its artistic merit, 
the default is wholly mine. 

The stamp on the cover is of the full blazon of the arms 
of the London, or " Old," East India Company, copied from 
one of the contemporary books of the Company. It does not 
exactly correspond with the few impressions of the Company's 
seals that have survived "the tooth of time," or the draughts of the 
arms on some of the Company's charters ; and, unfortunately, the 
original illuminated blazon of the arms furnished by the Heralds' 
College has been lost. In the Calendar of State Papers (East Indies 
and Persia), 1630-1634, just published by Mr. Noel Sainsbury, 
under the Court Minutes for November 26th, 1630, it is recorded 
that on the Company bestowing a hundred marks toward glazing 
the East window of the church of St. Katherine Cree, the 
parishioners resolved to set up the Company's arms in the window, 
" for a memorial of their love to so religious a work." But this 
window has also disappeared in the Philistine rage of the past and 
passing generations of Englishmen for church restoration ; and I 
have, therefore, had nothing more authentic to guide me in the 
cutting of this brass block than the rare impressions of a similar 
block used by the " Old " East India Company on the backs of 
their leather-bound records in the seventeenth century. But 
there can be little doubt of its general accuracy. 

In conclusion, I desire to convey, through these pages, the 
expression of my warmest thanks to all those who have aided me 
in the preparation of the present volume, three of whom I must 
particularize by name. I can never sufficiently acknowledge my 
dues to Mr. Frederic C. Danvers for the lively interest he has 
taken in the work, the progress of which he has done everything 
in his power to facilitate. Indeed, I could never have brought 
it to so speedy a completion without his cordial co-operation. 
I am under the deepest obligation to Mr. William Foster, 
of the India Office, who made the necessary transcript from 
the original MS. of "the Register of Letters, &c." and further 
relieved me of the trouble of seeing the work through the press. 



Ixx INTRODUCTION. 

I am also indebted to his intimate knowledge, both of the 
India Office Records and the history of the parishes of London, 
for some of the most interesting and valuable biographical 
foot-notes in the volume, as also for the notes identifying 
and dating the various documents, and for the quotations 
from the records elucidating and illustrating their contents. 
And, above all, I feel grateful to him for the keen personal 
solicitude he has shown in promoting in every way in his power 
the successful completion of the volume, of which he has proved 
a most loyal and efficient co-editor. Neither can I too highly 
express my appreciation of the generosity shown by Mr. Quaritch 
in undertaking the publication of the volume. It can never pay 
him, in the way of trade profits ; and he has done it altogether 
for love, and the honour of England. It is only to be hoped 
that others of the publishing agents of the Secretary of State for 
India in Council may emulate his example, and occasionally bring 
out a volume of the " Old Records " of the India Office, uniform 
in size and typography, et cetera, with the volumes published by 
Mr. Henry Stevens and Mr. Quaritch, until the whole of them 
for the seventeenth century, or at least for the period between 
1599 and 1623, have been reproduced in print. 

If, also, the Spaniards have taken a just pride in celebrating 
the fourth centenary of the discovery of the Americas by Columbus, 
and the Portuguese are to follow them by celebrating the fourth 
centenary of the doubling of the Cape of Good Hope by Da Gama, 
is it too much to suggest that Englishmen should also begin to 
bestir itself for the celebration of the third centenary of the 
" Old " East India Company's " First Voyage " in 1601 ? Nothing 
else that could be devised would give so great a stimulus to the 
elucidation of the early history of the Company, and to the 
popular appreciation of the abiding debt of this country to them. 

The discovery of the seaway to India round the south 
extended continent of Africa was in reality a far more 
courageous emprise than that of the Americas ; for all the way 
across the Atlantic Ocean Columbus was in the northern 
hemisphere, and therefore in the guardianship of the same 
heavens familiar to him from his infancy. But the Portuguese 
and the Dutch and English who first adventured after them 



INTRODUCTION. Ixxi 

down into the southern hemisphere, and round past the utmost 
horn of Africa, were still haunted, all through the fifteenth, 
sixteenth, and even seventeenth centuries, by the old super- 
stition that they were descending into Hades ; and they have left 
behind them repeated expression of the ghostly terrors they 
experienced as, in sailing ever southward, they night after night 
found their old heavens passing away, and that they were entering 
not only into unknown seas and lands, but among the alien stars 
of new heavens they had taken no thought of, and which per- 
plexed and confounded all their spiritual bearings. Even to 
this day every passenger who sails by the Cape of Good Hope 
to Australia experiences something of this sensation, as of the 
very foundations of the world being out of course. In one of 
the old seventeenth-century Italian maps recently reproduced 
at Berlin in connection with the fourth centenary of the discovery 
of Columbus, the whole southern hemisphere beyond Africa 
is marked Patala, its Sanskrit designation, signifying Hell 
[literally, the " Wide "-place, or " Patent "-office] . Who also has 
not felt the stranga gladness on returning into the Mediterranean 
from the Indian Ocean, of again seeing in all the glory of 
their ancient place and brilliancy, the Northern Star, and the 
constellation of the Great Bear, Benetnaksh, Mizar and Alioth, 
Megrez, Phad, Merak, and Dubhe, the heavenly heptarchy 
that first gave its sacredness to the number 7 ? Christopher 
Schewitzer, of the Dutch East India Company's ship Asia, 
trading in the Indian Ocean between 1675 an d 1680, writes 
in his diary under date of July 23rd, 1680 : " At night : 
we saw again the Northern Star to our Great Joy : till then 
we had only the Southern Cross, which is a constellation 
of four stars which stand in this *^* order." And Surgeon 
Christopher Fryke, of the Dutch East India Company, in the 
narrative of his voyage between 1680 and 1686, to Batavia and 
back, writes : " When we came more and more in sight of the 
North Star, we began to be very cheerful, and fell a Singing 
of the Hymn, 

Hoe Schoon light ons de Morgen-Star." 

Citations like these go to the heart of heart of Englishmen, and 



Ixxii INTRODUCTION. 

should move us to hold in perpetual honour those middle-class 
citizens of London, who, nearly three hundred years ago, laid in 
the far-off Indian Ocean the first foundations of the now world- 
wide British Empire. 

When I began to edit the present volume, it was my intention 
to undertake the self-imposed task of editing all the Court Books 
of the "Old "East India Company, following the volume published 
by Mr. Henry Stevens, down to 1623. But after sixty, every year 
adds rapidly to one's incapacity for the incessant labour of minute 
verification required for the proper discharge of so burdensome a 
duty. This has become painfully clear to me during the past 
twelve months ; and for the future it is my purpose to allow 
nothing to interfere with the advancement, and, I pray God, the 
completion, upon my last tide, of the long delayed enlarged edition 
of my book on THE INDUSTRIAL ARTS OF INDIA. 



GEORGE BIRDWOOD. 



SAVAGE CLUB, 

December 21 st, 1892. 




CONTENTS. 



Order for the payment of overdue subscriptions, 
nth January, 1600/1 . . . . . i 

Commission from Queen Elizabeth to Captain Lancaster for the First 

Voyage, 24th January, 1600/1 . . . . .a 

The Company's Commission for the same voyage [February 1600/1] 4 

Letter from the Council to the Adventurers, encouraging them to 

proceed with the enterprise [26th October, 1600] . . 9 

Warrant from the Lord Treasurer for passage of victuals from port to 

port, 1 2th November, 1600 . . . . .n 

Second order of the Council for the payment of subscriptions [loth 

April, 1601] . . . . . . .12 

Royal Warrant for coinage of money for the First Voyage [nth 

January, 1600/1] . . . . . 13 

N otice from the Governour and Committees to certain adventurers to 

bring in their overdue subscriptions, 22iid April, 1601 . .18 

Circular Letter from Queen Elizabeth to the Kings of the East Indies 

[February, 1600/1 ?] . . . . 19 

Agreement between the Company and George Waymouth for an 

expedition in search of the North- West Passage, April, 1602 . 21 



Ixxiv CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Letter from Sir Julius Caesar to the Company requiring them to make 
stay of certain goods, in consequence of a claim to prize money set 
up by the crew of the Susan, 2/th October, 1603 . . 25 

Answer of the Company . . . . . .26 

Letter from the Lord Treasurer to the Company, forbidding the sale 
of their pepper until the King's stock shall have been disposed of, 
5th November, 1603 . . . . . 27 

Answer of the Company, 7th November, 1 603 . . .28 

Further Letter from the Lord Treasurer on the same subject [i3th 

November, 1603] . . . . . . .30 

Reply of the Deputy Governour, i5th November, 1603 . . 32 

Instructions from Captain Lancaster to the factors and others left by 

him at Bantam in the First Voyage, i2th February, 1602/3 33 

Letters from the Company to their factors at Bantam, December, 

1603 . . . 38,40 

Letter from the Council to the Company, on the subject of the sale of 
the King's and the Company's stocks of pepper, 3oth November, 
1603 . . . . . . . .42 

Answer of the Company, 8th December, 1603 . . -44 

Letter from James I. to the King of Bantam, carried out in the Second 

Voyage [1604] . . . . . . .46 

Royal Commission to Captain Henry Middleton for the Second Voyage, 

3rd March, 1603/4 . . . . . .48 

Commission from the Company for the same voyage . . . 5 1 

Letters from the Kings of Tidore, Bantam and Ternate, to James I., 

brought home in the Second Voyage [1605] . . 67, 68 

Privileges obtained by Captain Lancaster from the King of Acheen . 69 



CONTENTS. Ixxv 

PAGE 

Notes concerning the Islands of Banda, Amboyna, Celebes, Boeton 
and Seran, with the wares to be sold or purchased there, &c. 
[1605 or 1606] . . . . . . -73 

Notes of a [Dutch ?] voyage to the Indies, with information as to Indian 

ports, wares, &c. . . . . . . .80 

Pass to John Knight, employed in a voyage to the North- West, loth 

April, 1606 . . . . . . .86 

Commission to certain officers to board and assist the home-coming 

ships of the Second Voyage, yth May, 1606 . . -87 

Agreement with the porters for unloading the vessels, loth May, 1606 88 
Agreement with the wharfinger, i oth May, 1606 . . .89 

Letter to Captain Keeling forwarding bills of lading and invoices in the 

Second Voyage, 25 th March, 1604 . . . . .90 

Captain Henry Middleton's instructions to the factors left at Bantam in 
the Second Voyage, ist October, 1605, with a list of their names 
and wages . . . . . . . . 91 

Estimates for a Third Voyage, with lists of goods, &c., proposed to be sent 95 

Petition for letters from the King to certain Eastern Princes and 

Governors for the Third Voyage [1606/7] .... 103 

Copies of the Royal Letters thus obtained, dated 23rd February, 1606/7 IO 5 

Warrant from the Judge of the Admiralty to apprehend absconding 

sailors, 1 6th March, 1606/7 . . . . .110 

Royal Commission to William Keeling and William Hawkins for the 

Third Voyage, 1 4th February, 1606/7 . in 

Commission from the Company for the same voyage, 9th March, 

1606/7 .114 

Sir James Lancaster's directions for the voyage to the Indies 

[February, 1606/7] -136 



Ixxvi CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Bill of adventure to the factors, i7th February, 1600/1 . .1.38 

Bill of adventure to the subscribers, jyth February, 1600/1 . . 139 

Bond given by the factors for the Third and subsequent Voyages 

[January, 1606/7] .140 

Bond given by the sureties for the factors for the Third Voyage 

[January, 1606/7] ...... 143 

Bonds entered into by the commanders, masters, pursers, &c., of the 

Third Voyage [March, 1606/7] . . . . .145 

Letter from the Company to their factors at Bantam, nth March, 

1606/7 . . . .147 

Letter from the Company to Captain David Middleton at Plymouth, 

28th March, 1607 . . . . . 152 

Letter from the Company to Captain William Keeling, 28th March, 

1607 . 154 

Notes of a conference between representatives of the Company and the 
Farmers of the Customs, in the presence of the Lord Treasurer, 
5th April, 1607 . . 155 

Ordinances established by the Company for the regulation of the trade 

[loth February, 1600/1] ...... 156 

Resolution of the Company to attempt the discovery of the North- 
West Passage, and regulations for the conduct of business at their 
meetings [nth January, 1601/2] .... 158 

Charter granted by Queen Elizabeth, founding the Company, 3ist 

December, 1600 . . . . . . .163 

Agreement between the Company and William Cobreth for the Voyage 

to the North West, 2oth April, 1602 .... 190 

Commission from the Lord High Admiral authorizing the ships of the 
First Voyage to make reprisals against Spanish vessels, 23rd April, 
1601 ........ 191 



CONTENTS. Ixxvii 

PAGE 

Letter from the Lord High Admiral to the Judge of the Admiralty 
Court, ordering the preparation of the preceding Commission, I4th 
January, 1600/1 . . . . . . . 195 

Letters Patent authorizing the Company to carry out 2O,ooo/. in foreign 
money, without recoining, in the Third Fay age, 5th January, 
1606/7 ........ 196 

Letters Patent exempting spices and drugs sold by the Company for 
re-exportation from the operation of the statute for the well 
garbling of spices, 9th August, 1606 . . . . 199 

Petition to the King for the grant of the said Letters Patent, with the 
King's reference of the request to the Lord Treasurer and others 
[1606] . . . . . . . . 205 

Petition to the Council for licence to carry out in the Fourth Fbyage 

foreign money to the value of i^ooo/. without recoining [1607] . 207 

Further petition that the amount may be increased to 2o,ooo/. [1607] 208 

Application for a warrant to apprehend absconding sailors [January, 

1606/7] ........ 209 

Petition to the Lord High Admiral begging that men may not be 

pressed from the Company's ships [1606/7] . . . 209 

Petition to the King for prohibition of the import of pepper [Novem- 
ber, 1609] . . . . . . .210 

Petition to the Council that no further licences for trade should be 
issued to any but the Company, and that they should be authorized 
to repel force by force and to export as much foreign coin as 
necessary [1606 or 1607] ...... 2-11 

Petition to the Lord Treasurer that a dispute with the Farmers of the 

Customs be referred to arbitration [1606] . . . 212 

Petition to the Council, complaining of the doings of Sir Edward 

Michelborne [1606] . . . . . .213 



Ixxviii CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Petition to the Council for licence to carry out in the Fourth Voyage 

foreign money to the value of i8,ooo/. without recoining [1607] . 214 

Petition to the King for licence to carry out in the Fourth Voyage 
foreign money to a limit of 2o,ooo/. without recoining [December, 
1607] ........ 215 

Petition to the Earl of Salisbury for royal letters to carry out in the 

Fourth Voyage [1607 or 1608] . . . . .216 

Letter from the Lord Treasurer to Sir Thomas Lake, instructing him 
to prepare a licence for the transportation of 2o,ooo/. in foreign 
money without recoining, 2ist December, 1607 . . .216 

Petition to the Earl of Salisbury that letters of safe conduct might be 
obtained from the Grand Signior for trade at Aden and Mocha 
[1607 or 1608] . . . . . . .217 

Petition to the Council that a dispute as to the customs payable on a 

cargo of cloves be referred to arbitration [January, 1608/9] 2I ^ 

Petition to the Earl of Salisbury complaining of the capture of some of 
the Company's servants by the Portuguese near Surat [August, 
1609] . . . . . . . .219 

Bond given by the pursers for the Fourth Voyage [1607 or 1607/8] . 220 

Bond given by the Company's " hired servants to be employed in any 

place" [1607 or 1607/8] ... . . . . 222 

Bond given by the Preacher for the Fourth Voyage [1607/8] . . 223 

Bond given by the pursers or others employed in the Fourth Voyage 

engaging to " save harmless their sureties "[ [607/8] . . 224 

Letters Patent for the transportation in the Fourth Voyage of 2O,ooo/. in 

foreign money without recoining, 8th February, 1607/8 . .224 

Royal Commission to Alexander Sharpie and Richard Rowles for the 

Fourth Voyage, 8th February, 1607/8 . . . .227 



CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Note of royal letters carried out in the Fourth Voyage, February, 1607/8 . 23 1 

Royal letters of safe conduct for certain of the factors of the Fourth 

Voyage, 23rd February, 1607/8 . . . . .232 

Letter from the Governour to Alexander Sharpie commending Joseph 

Salbancke to his especial consideration [March, 1607/8] . . 234 

Letter from the Adventurers of the Third Voyage to their servants in 
the Indies, sent by the ships of the Fourth Voyage, I2th March, 
1607/8 ........ 236 

Draft Bill of Adventure to Philip de Graeffe, for the Fourth Voyage 

[1607/8] . . 239 

Commission from the Company to Alexander Sharpie and Richard 

Rowles for the Fourth Voyage, 29th February, 1607/8 . . 240 

List of documents delivered to Alexander Sharpie and Richard Rowles, 

March, 1607/8 ...... 264, 265 

Outline of a safe conduct which the Company desired should be procured 
from the Grand Signior, for trade at Aden and Mocha [1607 or 
1608] . . . . . . . .266 

Letter from the Adventurers of the Fourth Voyage to Humphrey Smyth 
at Hull, requesting him to view, and negotiate for, the ship 
Merchant Royal, for a Fifth Voyage, 2oth April, 1608 . . 267 

Instructions to Robert Earle, sent to assist Mr. Smyth, 2oth April, 1608 268 

Bill of Adventure to Philip de Graeffe, for the Fourth Voyage, 

20th June, 1608 ....... 269 

Draft Bill of Adventure to be given by a subscriber to the Fourth 

Voyage, to one adventuring under him, 4th July, 1608 . .271 

The Bill of Adventure for this purpose as finally adopted [July, 1608] . 272 

Bill of Adventure to the subscribers of the Fourth Voyage [November, 

1608] . . . . . . . .273 



Ixxx CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Bill of Adventure to the subscribers of the Third Voyage, 26th April, 

1608 ........ 274 

List of persons to whom bills of adventure for the Third Voyage were 

issued, with the amount subscribed in each case [April, 1608] . 275 

Warrant from the Lord Treasurer for the transportation of foreign coin 

to the value of 6ooo/. in the Fifth Voyage, nth April, 1609 . 282 

Royal Commission to David Middleton for the Fifth Voyage, nth April, 

1609 . . . . . . . . 282 

Letter from the Company to the factors at Bantam, carried out by David 

Middleton, i^th April, 1609 ..... 285 

Bond given by Edmond and George Scott on the one side and the 
Governour and Company on the other to stand to the award of the 
arbitrators appointed to settle a matter in dispute between them 
[March or April, 1609] ...... 293 

List of persons to whom bills of adventure for the Fourth Voyage 
were issued, with the amount subscribed in each case [1608 or 
1609] . 294 

Commission from the Company to David Middleton for the Fifth 

Voyage, I4th April, 1609 ...... 295 

Letter from the Company to the Commander of any ship returning from 
the Indies, in the behalf of the officers of his Majesty's Customs, 
and for reserving of all strange fowls and beasts, i4th August, 1609 305 

Letter from the Company to Anthony Marlowe and Francis Bucke, 
prisoners at Lisbon, acquainting them with the efforts being 
made for their relief, J4th August, 1609 . . . .306 

Letter from the Governour to the Justices of the Peace at Crayford, 
requesting the punishment of certain absconding shipwrights, 2^th 
September, 1609 ....... 307 



CONTENTS. Ixxxi 

PAGE 

Letter from the Governour to Sir Robert Mansfield, requesting per- 
mission to lay some ordnance on the King's wharf at Deptford, 
25th September, 1609 ...... 307 

Commission to Barber to board the Dragon and to see that no 

goods be carried out of her without order, I5th November, 1609 . 308 

Letter from the Company to the factors of the Fourth Voyage, sent 

by the ships of the Sixth Voyage, March, 1609/10 . . 308 

Letter from the Company to the commanders of the Fourth Voyage, 

sent by the same conveyance, March, 1609/10 . . .311 

Letter from the Company to the factors at Bantam, sent in the Sixth 

Voyage, J 9th March, 1609/10 . . . . .312 

Letter from the Company to the factors at Surat, by the ships of the 

Sixth Voyage, I5th March, 1609/10 . . . -3*5 

Instructions to Lawrence Femell and the other factors of the Sixth 

Voyage [March, 1609/10] . . . . . 319 

Commission from the Company to Sir Henry Middleton, Nicholas 

Down ton and others, for the Sixth Voyage, March, 1609/10 . 328 

Royal letters to Eastern Princes and Governours carried out in the Sixth 

Voyage [1609/10] . . 348 

Warrant from the Lord Treasurer for the transportation of money into 

Ireland, 4th October, 1610 ..... 355 

Royal Commission to Sir Henry Middleton for the Sixth Voyage, lyth 

March, 1609/10 ....... 356 

Royal Commission to Anthony Hippon for the Seventh Voyage, 4th 

December, 1610 ....... 359 

Agreement between the Company on the one part and Peter Floris and 
Lucas Antheumis on the other, for their participation in the Seventh 
Voyage, i3th December, 1610 . . . . 363 



Ixxxii CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Commission from the Company to Anthony Hippon, Peter Floris, 
Lucas Antheumis and others, for the Seventh Voyage [December, 
16 1 o, or January, 1610/11] ..... 369 

A revised commission to the same [December, 1610, or January, 

1610/11] . . . .379 

Royal letters carried out in the Eighth Voyage [1611] . 388, 422 

Commission from the Company to John Saris and Gabriel Towerson, 

for the Eighth Voyage, 4th April, 1611 . . . 396 

Royal letters carried out in the Seventh Voyage [1611] . .421 

Statement by Peter Floris and Lucas Antheumis of their plans for the 

Seventh Voyage [1611] . . . . . . 427 

Petition to the Lord Treasurer complaining of the wrongs done to the 

Company by the Dutch in the East Indies [1611] . . 429 

Letter from Robert Middleton to certain burgomasters at Amsterdam 

upon the same subject, 5th October, 1611 . . . 432 

Letter from Samuel Pasfyld at Amsterdam to Robert Middleton 

upon the same subject, 2Oth December, 1611 . . 434 

A "Pass" from the Grand Signior for trade to the Red Sea, i8th 

February, 1610/11 ...... 434 

Royal Commission to Thomas Best and Thomas Aldworth for the 

Tenth Voyage, 6th January, 1611/12 . . . -437 

Royal Commission to Thomas Best to conclude a treaty with the Great 

Mogul on behalf of King James [1611/12] . . . 441 

Royal Commission to Christopher Newport and Joseph Salbancke for 

the Twelfth Voyage, 6th January, 1611/12 . . . 442 

Agreement between the Company and Sir Thomas Roe, ambassador to 

the Great Mogul, i6th November, 1614 . . . . 446 



CONTENTS. Ixxxiii 

PAGE 

Royal Commission to Nicholas Downton for a voyage on account of the 

First Joint Stock [1613/14] ..... 449 

Royal Commission to David Middleton for a voyage on account of the 

First Joint Stock, 21 st April, 1614 . . ' . . 452 

Instructions to Sir Thomas Roe, for the settlement of a trade in Persia 

[1616?] . . 455 

Letter to the Company from Richard Steel, containing proposals for 
trading to Persia, erection of waterworks at Agra, &c. [1616 or 

. 457 



Royal Commission to Benjamin Joseph and Henry Pepwell for a voyage 

in 1616, dated 20th December, 1615 . . . . 463 

Letters Patent authorizing the Company to carry out foreign coin as 
usual, notwithstanding a recent proclamation ; also giving them 
power to issue commissions to their captains and commanders to 
punish offenders and exercise martial law, for which purpose a 
special seal is appointed, and to examine their servants upon oath, 
I4th December, 1615 . . . . . 468 

Translation of a letter from the Great Mogul to King James [1615?] . 478 

Letters Patent authorizing the sale of spices, &c., without garbling, if in 
bulk j and permitting the Company to carry out foreign silver to 
the value of 6o,ooo/. a year, i ith July, 1616 . . . 479 

Letter from King James, authorizing the establishment of a Scottish 
East India Company under Sir James Cunningham of Glegarnock 

[1617] . . 490 

Letter from the inhabitants of the Banda Islands offering to make an 

alliance with the English, and sell spices to them only [1615 ?] . 492 

Form of commission from the Company to the commander of a fleet 493 
Form of commission from the Company to the captain of a ship . 497 



Ixxxiv CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Royal Warrant to the Master of the Ordnance to furnish a piece of 
artillery for presentation to the King of Macassar, i3th January, 
1616/17 . . 499 

Letters Patent for export of foreign coin (imperfect) . . . 500 

Agreement with George Hall, Anchorsmith, for the manufacture of 

anchors, &c., 5th May, 1618 . . . . . 501 

Directions to Richard Mountney for the keeping of the accounts of the 

Second Joint Stock [loth December, 1619] . . . 502 



of firttrrs 



THE 



REGISTER OF LETTERS, &c. 



OF THE 



GOVERNOR & COMPANY OF MERCHANTS OF LONDON 
TRADING INTO THE EAST INDIES. 





PPON 1 complainte made the itf by [the] new authorized 
Companie of m'chauntf preparinge to trade to the 
East Indies that certen psons w dl heeretofore pmysed 
and assured by their subscripcons when the saide 
voyadge was first proiected to advanc[e] certen 
somes of money for the pceedinge in the same vpon confidence & 
assurance whereof the p r paracon for the said 
voyadge hath been vndertaken and advanced to a 
full redines, and yet neverthelesse that the said 
psons would since vpon some vndue p r tentes 
retract their former pmyses in that behalfe Whereof 
would ensue y i by the want of their pmysed contribucons the 
voyadge must breake. Their Lo ps : vppon due Consideracon 

1 At a Court held on the gth Jan. 160^ it was ordered " that a present information 
" and complaint shalbe made to the LI of the Councell of suche as have disapointed 
" the preparation of the voyage that they may be called before ther Lordshippes to 
" receave suche order as to ther honors shalbe thought meet." As the result of this 
application, the above order was issued, which was "read to the gen r alty" at the 
next meeting of the Company and entered at length on the minutes. 

P 



An order taken by 
the lies : for such 
as haue promised & 
sett downe their Con- 
tribucons & not 
brought the said con- 
tribucons to the 
Trer. 



2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

how greatelie it doth importe y c hono r of the realme and 
thestate of the present affaires thereof that the said voyadge 
should not be hindred or ou r throwne by any such default 
and indirect meanes, and Considering alsoe how weake 
allegacons of excuse haue been made by the psons refusers 
it hath been therefore this day ordered by their Lo? 3 that notw th - 
standinge the p r tences of the foresaid psons they shall w th out 
further delaie and namelie by Saterday next furnish their pmysed 
Contribucons or otherwyse that order shalbe taken by the ftf w th 
such as shall refuse the same to Committ them t[o] prison vntill 
they Conforme themselues & make satisfaccon accordinge to their 
subscripcons. the xj th of lanuarie 1600. 




by the grace of God Queene of England 
c To o r trustie and welbeloued lames Lancaster 1 
Esqier Greeting. Whereas diuers of o r loueing subiectf 
haue been peticioners vnto vs for o r Royall assent 
to be graunted vnto them that they att their owne adventures 
capt Lancaster his Costs and chardges aswell for the hono r of this 

Comission gen'all of 

the ffleete to the o 1 ' Realme of England, as for the increase & 

East Indies from the 

Qeene. advancem te of Trade and m r chandize w th m the 

same, might Adventure and sett forth certeine voyages to 
the East Indies w th a Convenient nomber of shipps & 
pinnaces by way of tramque and m r chandizeinge : Wee gratiouslie 

1 The name of James Lancaster is familiar as that of the successful leader of the 
Company's first venture to the Indies. Of his early life little is known. He is said 
to have been a native of Basingstoke, and to have been at one time in Portugal as a 
soldier, and afterwards as a merchant. In 1591 he took part in Captain Raymond's 
ill-fated expedition to the East Indies, of which he was one of the few survivors. He 
was next engaged in an enterprize to the coast of Brazil, where an attack was made 
on the Portuguese settlement of Pernambuco. He took an active part in the form- 
ation of the East India Company, and was one of the original directors, or " com- 
mittees" as they were then called. Of the voyage now undertaken, as also of his 
two previous voyages, a iull account is given in Mr. C. R. Markham's Voyages of Sir 
James Lancaster (Hakluyt Society, 1877). On his return, Lancaster was knighted by 
King James ; and thenceforward he appears as an active and trusted member of the 
Company, whose advice was constantly sought and listened, to with the utmost 
deference. He died in June, 1618, 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 3 

inclininge to their humble peticon in that behalfe and favoringe 
soe good a desier & honorable enterprise. Haue been pleased to 
giue lycence vnto o r said Subiectf to pceede in the said voiadgf , 
& for the better inabling them to establish a trade into & from the 
said East Indies Haue by o r tres Pattentf vnder o r greate seale of 
England beareing date at Westminster the last daie of december 
last past incorporated o r said Subiectf by the name of the 
Gou r no r & Companie of the nV'chauntf of London trading into the 
East Indies, & in the same ires Pattentf haue geven them the sole 
trade of theast Indies for the terme of XV teen yeares w th diuers 
priuiledges & ymunnities mencioned in the said tres Pattentf , as 
therein y* doth & may appeare. And whereas by vertue of o r said 
lycence & tres Pattentf soe by vs graunted to them, they haue 
prepared & furnished seu r all shipps w th a Convenient nomber of 
m r chauntf Mariners and other o r said subiectf to be vsed and 
ymployed in the said voyadge & haue chosen you to be the 
principall Gou r no r or generall of all the said m r chaunt Mariners 
and other o 1 ' said Subiectf w ch are or shall be shipped in any of 
the said shipps. Wee gratiouslie favoring the said enterprise & 
approueing & allowinge of their choise of yo u to the said 
Gou r nmente, being desirous to furnish you w th all fitt and 
Convenient power & authoritie to rule and Gou r ne all and everie 
o r subiects ymployed in this voyadge by a due obedience to be by 
them yealded unto yo u , in the observinge & executing of all good 
orders & constitucons as you shall thinke Convenient to ordaine 
& appointe for the furtheraunce of the said voiadge, to the ho : of 
vs and o 1 ' Realme & for the advauncment of the said trade we doe 
hereby straightlie chardge and Comaund all & eu r y pson and 
psons ymployed vsed or shipped or w ch shall be ymployed vsed or 
shipped in this voiadge in the said ffower shipps, or any of them, 
to giue all due obedience & respect vnto yo u , during the said 
voiadge, & to beare themselues one towardes another in all good 
order and quietnes for any occasion that should breed mutinie, 
quarrells or discention amongst them to the hindraunce of the 
good successe w ch is to be hoped for through Gods providence of 
the said intended voyadge & in default of such dutie & obedience 
to be pformed towardes you, & for the Correccon & quenchinge 
of all such mutenie quarrells or dissencons that shall or may 

P I 



4 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

growe or be mooued by the disorder evill disposicon or pversnes 
of any of the said psons. Wee doe heareby authorize you, to 
Chastice Correct & ponish all offenders, & transgresso in that 
behalfe according to the quallitie of their offence, w th such ponish- 
mentf as are comonlie vsed in all o r Armes by Sea when the 
offences are not Capitall, & for capitall Offences as wilfull murder 
w ch is hatefull in the sight of God, or any notable muteny w ch is 
one offence that may tend to the ouerthrowe of the said voyadge 
the same beinge trulie and iustlie proued against any the pson or 
psons aforesaid. Wee doe hereby giue you full power and 
aucthoritie to vse & putt in execucon o r law called Marshall lawe 
in that behalfe. And theis o r Ires shall be therein yo r sufficient 
warrant & dischardge for the doing and Executing of all & singuler 
the premisses. In witnes whereof we haue caused o r Ires to be 
made Patent?, Witnes o r selfe at Westminster the xxiiij th of 
lanuarie in the xliij th yeare of o r Reigne. 1 




|HEAREAS 2 we the Gou r no r and Companie of the 
m r chauntf of London tradinge into the East Indies 
haue chosen you m r Lancaster for the cheefe Gou r no r 
or gen r all to gouerne or rule all such marchauntf, 
Mariners, officers & other her Ma ties subiect? w ch are ymployed by 
The remission to vs or are or sha11 be shipped in any of the ffower 
8o^o r e and a in a s s u" shipps by vs prepared and set forth for this 
present intended voiadge towardes the East Indies 
And whereas the Queenes most excellent ma^ approueing and 
allowinge of o r choise of you to the said Gou r nment and favo r ing 
the said enterprize hath by her gratious tres Patent? vnder the 
greate seale of England the better to inable yo 11 to keepe yo r 
wholle Companie in good agrement one towardes another and in 
obedience and due respect towardes you, geaven you authoritie to 

1 1601. 

2 This Commission " conceaved by the Comitties " was read at a General Court, 
on the loth Feb. 160^, and was " well lykd of and agreed to be written in fowre 
" severall partes and vnto everie part the Comon seale of the Companie to be added 
" to thend that in everie ship one of the said Comissions may be kepte in the handes 
" of the principall m r chauntes of everie ship." (Court Minutes.) 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 5 

chastice and correct such offences as shall aryse in the said 
voiadge accordinge as in the said Ires Patent^ att lardge appeareth 
w ch Ires Patentf extendinge onelie to the generall gouernm te of 
yo r wholle Companie shipped in the said shipps, for their Civill 
behavio r whilest the are abroade in the said voiadge and not unto 
the managinge & ordering of the trade of m r chandize for w ch the 
voyadge is principallie appointed and sett forth. Wee therfore 
by theis o r present ires or Comission under o r comon scale for the 
orderinge and disposeinge of all such m r chandize, gould, pearle 
lewells and other Comodities w ch are to be bought bartered pro- 
cured exchandged or otherwyse obtened in this present voyadge 
doe for yo r direccon and remembrance in that behalfe sett downe 
theis clawses ordenances and decrees heerafter followinge: 
declaringe heerby o r purpose and intencon how we appointe and 
ordeine that the traffique of this present voiadge shall be ordered 
and caried : w ch ordenances and decrees wee will and requier you 
to observe and keepe, and doe giue yo u power and aucthoritie to 
see the same executed and putt in vse accordinglie viz 

We doe ordeine and decree that all the preparacons of moneys 
m r chandizes and other provision for the said voyadge and all 
Comodities moneys lewells and other merchandize retourned in 
the said voiadge shall be holden reputed and accompted and be 
carried managed ordered and handled as one entire Accompt and 
comen stocke of adventure wherein noe private traffique barter 
exchandge or m r chandizeing shall be vsed practized or admitted 
by any pticuler Gou r no r Capten marchaunte Agent ffacto r m r 
Marriner officer or other pson whatsoever imployed in the said 
voiadge or pmitted to goe in the same upon peine of the losse & 
forfecture to the vse of the generall Companie and adventurers in 
this voyadge of all somes of moneys lewells wares goodes or 
m r chandizes w ch shall be found in the said shipps or ells were 
carried forth or retourned home by any private or pticuler man 
and not conteyned and brought into the generall and Comon 
accompte & ioynt adventure of the said voyadge. 

AND to thend this prejudice of private traffique may the 
better be avoided We doe ordeine and appointe that due Inqui- 
sicon be made in all and euery y e severall shipps of the said 
voyadge and elswheare by search of all such Cheste, Boxes, 



6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Packe, Packette, Bookes, writing^ and other meanes whereby 
discouery may be made of the breach of this present ordenance. 

AND we doe in like manner ordeine and decree for the 
avoideinge of all vnfaithfullnes, and deceipte to be vsed in the 
said voyadge in the defraudinge of the gen r all adventure w ch is 
p r pared and set forth att the greate Cost? and chardgC of such as 
repose their trust and confidence in the officers and mynistors 
imployed in the said voyadge that what pson soever shall be found 
vnfaithfull and vniust in the said voyadge by imbecillinge or 
w th drawinge of any the goodes wares nV'chandizes lewells or 
other Comodities whatsoeuer either belonging to the adventure 
sent out or being pcell of the retourne of the same w ch was, is, 
or shall be either p r pared bought or belongeing to the Comon or 
generall stocke or adventure that such pson shall be barred & 
excluded to demaunde of the Gou r no r & Companie of the said 
merchauntt of London tradeing into the East Indies any 
accompte reckoninge or payment of any wage salarye contract 
or interteinement for his ymployment in the voyadge Wherevnto 
he was or otherwyse might haue beene interessed yf such offence 
had not been Comitted. And further that euery such pson soe 
offendinge shall be <psecuted by the said Gouerno r and Companie 
of merchauntf of London tradinge to theast Indies accordinge to 
the qualitie of their offence in that behalfe by the lawes and 
statutes of this Realme. 

AND furthermore we doe ordeine that yf vppon deliu r y of 
her ma tics ires to the Princes of those places where o r shipps shall 
arrive you shall be peaceablie received and enterteyned as mar- 
chauntf to Comerce and traffique w th the people of those Countries 
or places, and be secured and warranted heareafter to frequent and 
visite those places. Then we doe ordeine and decree that you 
shall select out of the youngest sorte of o r ffacto 1 ' 8 and others 
intertayned by vs or voluntarilie suffered to goe in the voyadge 
such and soe many of the aptest and towardest of them as you 
shall thinke meete and as shall haue best approved them selues fit 
for such an ymployment to recide and abide in those places where 
you shalbe soe peaceablie received yf yo u may be pmitted there- 
vnto, takeinge sufficient and carefull order for the defrayinge and 
supplyinge of their chardges untill those places shall be hereafter 



THE EAST INDIA C6MPANV. 7 

visited w th another ffleete sent from hence, and leaueing w th them 
such advise and direccon for their better informacon how to Carrie 
themselues in those places as by yo r good discrecon w th the advise 
of such as you shall conferr thereof shall be thought meete & as 
time and experience of those places shall direct you. 

AND forasmuch as the daies of mans lyfe are lymitted and 
the Certentie thereof for their Continuance and end onelie knowne 
vnto god Wee the said Gou r no r and Companie of marchauntf 
of London tradinge to theast Indies doe heereby ordeine and 
prouide that yf yt shall happen you the said lames Lancaster to 
derate this mortall lyfe before the retourne of the said shipps then 
from and after the decease of you the said lames Lancaster we 
doe by this o 1 ' present Comission vnder o r Comon scale constitute 
and appointe yo u m r John Middleton 1 to be the cheefe Gou r no r or 
generall of the said m r chauntf marino rs Officers and other her 
ma ties su bject by vs ymployed or otherwyse shipped in the said 
voyadge willing and requiring you and geving you like power and 
aucthoritie to putt in execucon the said ordenancf and decrees 
conc r ninge the orderinge and disposeinge of the traffique and 
m r chandizeinge of the said voyadge as we haue donne to the said 
lames Lancaster and yf yt shall happen by Codes appointment 
that both you the said lames Lancaster and lohn Middleton 
shall decease in the said voyadge then we ordeine and appointe 
the Principall and gen r all gouernm te of the wholle Companie their 
in ymployed or shipped in this present voyadge unto you m r 
Wiftm Brund 2 being alsoe one of o r ffower principall merchaunte 
whome we haue chosen and interteined for the orderinge and 
disposeing of the marchandizes and traffique of the said voyadge 
requieringe you yf you shall fortune to surviue the said lames 
Lancaster and lohn Middleton to observe and keepe the same 
o r ordenancf and decrees before mencioned ordened and appointed 
by vs for the traffique and marchandizeing of the said viadge 
geueing you the like authoritie to execute the same as is formerlie 

1 Brother to Sir Henry and David Middleton. He commanded the Hector in this 
voyage, and died at Bantam in the spring of 1603. 

2 Commander of the Assertion. Accidentally killed on the outward voyage at the 
Bay of Antongil in Madagascar by the guns of the Dragon whilst a salute was being 
fired. 



8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

hearein geven to the said lames Lancaster] & lohn Middleton 
or eyther of them & yf you the said Wittm Brund shall fortune 
to decease in the said voyadge then we doe appointe the imediate 
succession and execucon of the said chardge and gou^m 10 afore 
said vnto you m r lohn Havarde one other of o r said Principall 
m r chauntf requiringe you to see o r ordenance and decrees to be 
kept and pformed geving vnto you the same power and aucthoritie 
as we haue hereby geven to the said lames Lancaster lohn Mid- 
dleton & Wittiam Brund or any of them. 

AND yf yt should fortune that all the said seuerall psons 
ymployed by vs as o r Principall m r chauntf in this present 
voyadge to decease Then we ordeine the wholle gou'nm 4 and 
chardge before mencioned to be vndertaken by one of you foure 
w ch are of the second sorte of marchauntf or facto" by vs 
ymployed in the said voyadge the same to be taken and executed 
successiuelie one after another as any of you shall happen to 
decease after the said chardge by the true meaninge hereof shall 
be cast vpon you w ch chardge we doe ordeine shall succeede in 
this manner viz 1 ffirst to o r second merchant shipped in the Redd 
Dragon next to o r second merchaunte or ffacto r shipped in the 
Hecto r , thirdlie to o r second m r chante or facto r shipped in the 
Assencon, and lastlie to o r second m r chante or ffacto r shipped in 
the Suzan. 

AND we doe further ordeine that as we haue appointed a 
succession o r principall merchaunte and Gouerno r of the wholle 
Companie imployed or shipped in this voiadge soe we doe order 
and decree that vppon whomsoeu r the said gou r nment in succes- 
sion shall fall by the decease of any the psons before named that 
he shall or may shipp or imbarke himselfe in the Admirall of o r 
ffleete & inioye and receave such place Cabbin easment and 
Comaundm* therein as o r said general! and principall Gouerno r 
formerlie didd. 

AND lastlie wheareas her ma ty by her Comission vnder the 
greate scale hath onelie appointed the generall Gouernment of all 
her subiectf ymployed in y e said voiadge vnto the said lames 
Lancaster w th out any appointeinge of succescon by like warrant 
to any that is ymployed in the said voiadge and that yt lyeth not 
in vs to giue any warrant for the correccon of offences by penall 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 9 

Lawes to be executed vpon the bodies of any her ma ties subiectf 
we doe in that behalfe as to men haueing reason and discrecon 
and to men that feare god offer vnto yo r good consideracons the 
beneficte of order and peaceable agreem te in matters and enter- 
prises vndertaken for a Comon good, Reposeing in you o r seuerall 
marchauntf and all yo u o r seuerall Officers appointed and inter- 
teyned in this voiadge a spetiall hope trust and Confidence that 
you will accorde & agree together and ioyne in freindshipp & 
amytie to doe & execute yo r vttermoste endevo 1 ' 8 for the benefitt 
of the voyadge w th out contencon, discorde or emulacon to be vsed 
amongst you guideinge yo r selues therein by that gen r all regiment 
and Sea gou r nm te w ch o r English ffieetf doe use when they sorte 
them selues together haueing a spetiall and due respect to him 
that is yo r Principall or Cape m r chaunte. And soe we Comend 
yo u and yo r travels to godf pvidence who guide you w tl1 his feare 
and defend you from all daungers. 




[FTER 1 o r heartie Comendacons: wheareas vppon o r Ires 
heertofore written vnto yo u touchinge her ma ties likeinge 
of yo r intencon to sett forth a voyadge to the East 
Indies, & alsoe of her gratious allowance and assent 
to the proiect of Articles and Condicons required for the pform- 
From the Counceii ance of the same wth * n assurance pmysed you 
* ^ heir AM Ueinge that the said voyadge shall receue no stay or in- 

freindes Alderman < 

Banninge:* Aider: terupcon, there hath beene sett downe as we are 

1 This is evidently the letter from the Lords of the Council, bearing date the 
z6th October, 1600, which was read at a General Courte on the 30th of that month, 
and in which " besides the warraunt of incoragem 1 geaven to the Companie to 

' proceade It was notid unto them that the action vndertaken by them was a publike 
' action and not to be dallied w th all and therfore did require that the names of such 
' as did ether w th drawe themselfes or practise to w th drawe others from proceading 
' thein shuld be certefyed to ther Lorshipes that they might examine the reason of 
1 ther discoragemV 

2 Paul Bannyng, Alderman, was prominent among the promoters of the Company, 
and was one of the original committees named in the Charter. One of the ships 
employed in the First Voyage the Susan was purchased from him ; and from 
1600 to 1602 he acted with Alderman Holliday as treasurer to the Company. 



10 FIRST LETTER BOOK OP 1 

Hoiuday:! Aid: gfevcn to vnderstand soe many rticular somes of 

Smyth* & the rest of i , / , 

the Adventurers in aduenture vnder the handes of divers Contributors 

the voiadge intended 

to theast indies for as are thought a Convenient pporcon or stocke to 

going forward wth 

feared/an 5 icTt* "* ^ e sett f rtn for yo r first voiadge & there vppon a 
pporcon hath beene made of shippinge victualls & 
other necessaries, wherein greate somes of money haue been dis- 
burced. Notw th standing all w dl , as we are informed there is some 
stay made amonge yo r selues of the pceedinge in this Action vpon 
some reporte spred amongest yo r selues, that the voyadge shall not 
be pmitted to goe forward, wherein we wish you to be better advised 
& not to be soe easilie drawne to make a doubt of her Ma tles assent 
and assurance soe late by vs Certified vnto you, w ch cannot be 
done without dishono r to her ma tlc or iniurie to vs, from whom 
you rec d yo r warrant to proceede : Lett yt therefore suffice that 
there is noe iuste cause whie you should make any doubt of going 
forward in yo r intended voyadge : But rather that you should 
therein vse all expedicon and possible speede to advance the same, 
knowing that otherwyse you may much preiudice yo r selues by yo r 

1 Sir Leonard Holliday or Haliday, Alderman, was Sheriff in 1595-96, and Lord 
Mayor in 1605-06. From 1600 to 1602 he was one of the treasurers of the Company, 
and he was nominated in the Charter as one of the first committees. In 1603 he was 
knighted by King James I. Six years later, he was put in nomination for the post of 
governor of the Company, but failed to secure election. He died gth Jan. 1611/12. 

2 Sir Thomas Smyth, the first Governor of the Company, was the second son ol 
Thomas Smith or Smyth, of Westenhanger, in Kent, for many years one of the 
Farmers of the Customs. Thomas succeeded his father in this post, and became one 
of the leading citizens of the metropolis. He was an active member, and for some 
time Governor, of the Muscovy Company, and in 1604 was sent on an embassy to 
that country. He was also at various periods Treasurer for the Virginian Plantations, 
and Governor of the French, Levant, and Sommer-Island Companies, and of the Com- 
pany of Merchants Discoverers of the North- West Passage. He is, however, best 
remembered for his long and prominent connection with the East India Company, of 
which he may be described as virtually the founder. He was named Governor in 
the Charter (1600), but early in the new year his fortunes underwent a temporary 
eclipse, and he had to resign the chair to Alderman Watts. He had been accused of 
participation in Essex's rash rebellion, and for a time he and his wife were held 
prisoners in the Tower. He succeeded in clearing himself from the charge, but it was 
not till the Queen's death that the Company ventured to place him again in the posi- 
tion of Governor. Henceforward he reigned supreme, being re-elected year after 
year, sometimes in spite of his protests. At last, in 1621, he insisted on giving up his 
post, much to the regret of the Company, and of all interested in maritime discovery 
or enterprise. He died 4th September, 1625. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. ti 

staggeringe and delaies, and yf yo 11 shall finde any knowne ympe- 
diment or practise vsed by any, that shall either w th drawe him 
selfe, or practise to w th drawe others from Contributinge that w ch 
hath been once by him or them sett downe and agreed vppon to 
adventure : wee wish you to advertice vs thereof that we may 
receiue some good reason by aunsweare from them, that may 
iustlie mooue them to haue lesse desier now, then they formerlie 
had to pceed in the said voiadge, for that we hold it to be a 
publicke Accon not to be dallied withall att mens private pleasures : 
And thus we bidd you farewell. 



FTER 1 MY hartie Comendacons wheareas by the 
sufferaunce & assent of her ma tie for the ho: of this 
Realme and the good of the Comon wealth a voyadge 
is p r paring by c r teine m r chauntf of London towardes 
the East Indies, And for the victualling of the ships ymployed in 
A warrant from the the said voiadge w th Biskett, meale & wheate & 
iad ge Th o e f r llctSK otner victuall the said m r chaunt haue appointed 
^KS to /the one Captaine Baker & Robert Pope to make 
pvisions as they best cann w th in the seu r all Coun- 
ties of Somerset Dorset & Devon & to shipp their provisions 
frome porte to porte to be brought together to the Portf of 
Darthmouth or Plymouth to be taken abourde their shipps as 
the shall come to the said Portf or either of them Theis are 
therefore to requier you to pmitt and suffer the said Capt : Baker 
and RoBt Pope & either of them, or the berer hereof in their 
behalff from tyme to time vntill the said shipps be gon on their 
voyadge, to lade into any shipp or vessell lieing in any the Portf 

1 For the providing of bread or any other necessaries " there is appointed to 
" goe to Dartmowthe & Plymowthe, Thomas Baker and Robarte Pope to loyne w th 
" capteine lohn Davies ffor providing all things there." (Court Minutes, 4th Oct. 1600.) 
A commission to this effect is entered on the minutes of the i6th idem. Later on 
(nth Nov. 1600) we find committees appointed " to make suyte to the Lord treasurer 
"for a lycence to transport provisions in the west countrey according to a letter 
"of M r In Sandy," and the present document is, no doubt, the result of this 
application. 



il FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

w th in the said seu r all Counties, any Biskett meale or wheate 
provided for the said voiadge& to passe the same from porte to porte 
vppon Bondes taken of them to retourne dew Certificate of the 
arrivall of the same at such portf in the said seu r all Counties for 
w ch the same shall be entred, by them or in their names. And in 
soe doeing this shall be vnto you sufficient dischardge ffrom 
Sackvile howse the 12 th of Nouember 1600. 

Yo r loueing ffreind 1 

To my verie loueing ffreindf her ma tics Officers of 
the Fortes & Creekf w th in the seu r all Counties of 
Som r set Dorsett & devon and eu r y of them to whome 
this doth or may Concerne. 



|PPON 2 Complainte made this day to their ft? by the 
Comitties of the East India Companie that the debtf 
of the present voyadge now by them sett forth 
amounteing to seaven thowsand poundes aboue the 
contribucons sett downe by the adventure are not paied the 
The connceu. second same growinge by reason of the backwardnes 
of^cn^KC and froward disposicons of divers psons that shew 
plies> them selues remisse and vnwilling to furnish 

their promised contribucons and alsoe their porcons of their 
supplies w ch since att their generall meeting^ att seu r all tymes 
haue been agreed on to yeald aboue their adventures a rate 
of iiij 8 in the pound for the cleireing of the said debt. Their 
Lo ps vppon due Consid r acon how much yt importeth the hono r 
of the state that soe publique an accon should not receave 
scandall and shamefull imputacon Haue this day ordered that 
forasmuche as the said debt in all or in parte is proportionablie 
due to be satisfied by eu r y Contribute 1 " of the voyadge. That 

1 Unsigned but evidently from Lord Buckhurst. See p. 28. 

2 This " order from the LL of her Ma es most honorable privie Councell " of the 
loth April, 1601, was read at a General Court held on the following day. It resulted, 
as stated on page 18, in the names of three persons being " presented to the LL;" 
one of these made his peace with the Company, but the remaining two were 
disfranchised and others admitted in their places. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 13 

therefore the said Companie and every adventuro r thereof shall 
w th out further deley not onelie pforme and satisfie their full 
contribucons agreed vpon promysed and set downe under their 
handf But alsoe their proportionable supplies according to their 
agrementf at their generall Courtf or otherwyse yf any pson or 
psons shall refuse to conforme them selues therevnto that then the 
Gou r no r deputie and Comitties of the said Companie or any fower 
of them shall by vertue of this their Lo? 3 order streightlie inioyne 
and Comaund the said psons to make their imediate apparance 
before their Lo : to thend their Lo ps may pceede to the punishinge 
of their contempt by refusinge to accomplish their owne agrem* & 
promyse soe much imparteing the publicke as their obstinacie & 
pversnes shall deserve. And to that end direccon is geven to a 
messenger of her ma ties Chamber to attend the said Gouerno r and 
Companie to bringe the said pties before their llf : . 




by the grace of God &c To o r Trustie 
and welbeloued Thomas Knevet Esquier warden of 
o r Mynte, Richard Martin Knight, & Richard Martyn 
his sonne m rs and workers of o r Moneys w th in o r 
Tower of London and ells wheare within o r Realme of England, 
A warrant for the & to Richard Rogerbe Comptroller Thomas Den- 
S y "he gl Ea f stTn n d e iI ^am provost of o r Mynte w th in o r said Tower of 
voyadge. London & to all other the Officers & Mynisters 

of o r said Mynte w th in o r said Tower of London to whome it 
shall appteine & to every of them greetinge. ffor asmuch as 

1 The following is the account of this coinage given in Ruding's Annals of the 
Coinage ofGrett Britain (London, 1817) : 

"By virtue of a Commission dated January u, in the same year (43 Eliz.), 
" Money was made of a kind unknown to the British Mint either before or since 
" her time, for it was by law exportable, and intended for the use of the East 
" India Company. It bore on one side the Queen's arms, and on the other a 
"portcullis; and was called either Indian Money, from the purpose for which it 
"was struck, or Portcullis Money, from the device impressed upon it. The 
" weight of it was regulated according to the respective weights of the Spanish 



I 4 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

we by the advyse of o r Councell for c r taine causes and Con- 
sideracons vs moueinge Haue fullie resolved and determined 
to cause to be now newlie made stricken and Coyned w th in o r 
said Mynte c r teine money & Coyne out of Bullion plate and 
forreine sylver, to be made stricken and Coyned w th y e pcullies on 
thone syde, & o r Armes of England on thother syde at c r taine 
values and ratf by vs appointed therefore & heerafter in theis 
present^ expressed or mencioned w ch money and coyne is 
principallie by vs intended to be for thuse traffique and trade of 
c r teine o r marchauntf latelie by vs incorporated by the name of 
Gou r no r & Companie of nVchauntf of London trading into the 
East Indies & the same money to be made of the ffines of Eleaven 
ounce twoe penny weight of fine sylver & eighteene penny weight 
of allay in the pound w 4 of Troy as is specified in certaine 
Indentures beareing date the 3O th day of lanuarie in the 25 th 
yeare of o r reigne, conc r ning makeing and coyning of certeine 
other o r moneys of gold and siluer .pticulerlie mencioned in the 

" Piastre, or piece of eight Reas, and the half, the quarter, and half-quarter of 
" the same, though they are now usually called the Crown, Half-Crown, Shilling and 
" Sixpence. Some Coinage of this sort was necessary ; for the Queen, when she first 
" incorporated the East India Company, would not permit them to transport the King 
" of Spain's Silver Coins to the East Indies, though she was frequently solicited by 
" the merchants. The reason which they assigned to induce her to grant this per- 
" mission, determined her to strike Coins for the particular purpose of circulation 
" in Asia. They represented to her Majesty, that her Silver Coin and Stamp were 
" not known in the East Indies, which they supposed would induce her to grant them 
" a license to send thither what Silver they pleased. The Queen and her Privy 
" Council replied, that, for the very reason alledged, it was her fixed and unalter- 
" able resolution not to permit them to send the Coin of the King of Spain, or of 
"any foreign Prince, to India; and that no Silver should be exported by her 
" merchants, but only such as should be coined with her effigies and picture on the 
" one side, and the portcullis on the other, of the just weight and fineness of the 
" Spanish pieces of eight, and pieces of four Rials. Her prudent reason for this 
" was, that her name and effigies might be hereafter respected by the Asiatics, and 
" she be known as great a Prince as the King of Spain." 

Ruding notes that " notwithstanding this determination, the pieces have only 
"her arms on the Obverse;" and he further quotes a passage from Malynes' Lex 
Mercatoria to the effect that " of these pieces were coined in the Tower of London for 
" a trial (in January 1600 [? 1601]) some six thousand Pounds, which could not be 
" made current in the East Indies because the Spanish pieces of eight Royals had 
" been before that time counterfeited by other nations, which made the East Indians 
" to doubt of our Coin, although without cause," 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 15 

same Indentures, w ch Indentures are madebetweene vs on the one 
ptie, the said Richard Martyn : now Knight by the name of 
Richard Martyn Cittizen and Alderman of London, then Warden 
& m r & worker of o r said moneys on the other pte, as in the same 
Indentures plainelie is expressed and contayned. And that alsoe 
the said money soe newlie to be made stricken & coyned by force 
of theis presentf, keepe in nomber a hundred and Nyne Testerns 
in the pound weight Troy aforesaid to be Coyned into Testerns of 
eight, Testerns of ffower, Testerns of twoe and single Testerns. 
And because o r said printe & moneys aforesaid by vs and o r 
Councell now as aforesaid intended to be newlie made strocken & 
Coyned for the intentf and purposes aforesaid, cannott continuallie 
be made according to the right standerd in as much as some tyme 
in default of the said m rs or workers their deputie or deputies yt 
may be made to stronge or too feble by too much or too little in 
fines or in both We pondering & Consideringe the same, will 
therefore & straightlie Comaund you and every of you, o r said 
Officers of o r Mynte to whome yt shall appteine. That when the 
said moneys vppon the assay before the deliuerie thereof be 
founde too stronge or too ffeble, all onelie in weight, or all onelie 
in fines or in both by two penny weight, in the weight of one 
pound Troy aforesaid, after the ould Computacon of Twentie 
penny weight in the ounce & noe more, the w ch two penny weight 
in that one, or two penny weight in that other, or two penny 
weight in both, shall be called remedie for the said m rs . That 
then such moneys be deliuered for good, soe always as the same 
default happen by casualtie and otherwyse not. But yf default 
be found in the said moneys in weight or in fines or in both over 
the said two penny w* in the pounde weight aforesaid. That then 
the deliu r aunce of the said moneys soe Coyned & stricken cease 
& that money to be challenged lesse then the good, & at the 
Cost? of the said m rs to be new molten & reforged, till yt be putt 
to printe as money dehVable. 

AND WE will That o r said Warden in respect of the said 
moneys soe newlie to be made stricken and Coyned as aforesaid 
shall receiue & take for vs, aswell of o r owne Bullion as of the 
Bullion of any other pson or psons whatsoeuer of everie pound 
weight of Troy soe made and Coyned Two and Twentie pence 



16 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

starlinge by nomber out of w ch xxij d the said m shall receiue for 
their workmanship & for all other manner of wastf , provisions & 
other necessaries in & aboute the making of the said moneys 
xiiij d by Tale, & soe shall remaine vnto vs vpon euery pounde 
weight soe Coyned viij d , out of w ch the said warden, Controller & 
other Officers of o r said Mynte shall receiue their ffees by the hand 
of o r said Warden, w ch o r will & pleasure is shall be paied in 
manner & forme as in the said mencioned Indentures beareing 
date the said xxx th day of lanuarie in the said xxv th yeare of o r 
Reigne & a scedule to the said Indenture annexed is lymitted & 
appointed, & that for the same o r warden shall be chardged and 
accomptable to vs & o r heires & Successo rs in such manner as he 
is & ought to be, for that w ch is or ought to be cominge to vs by 
force of the said Indenture bearing date the said xxx th daye of 
lanuarie in the said xxv th year of o r Reigne of or for the Coynadge 
of the sylver moneys made & Coyned by vertue of the said 
Indentures. And o r will & pleasure is & we doe straightlie 
commaund & chardge you & eu r y of you o r said Officers of o r 
Mynte to whome yt shall apptaine That from tyme to tyme you 
cause to be well and trulie entred & recorded in one Lieger & 
melting booke all such Bullion of Silver as from tyme to tyme 
shall be brought into the saied Minte to be Coyned by force of 
theis p r sent, w ch entrie shall comprehend the weight & ffines of 
the same Bullion, the pties name that brought yt in, & what day, 
& to be assayed tried & pixed & the rateing & the melting thereof 
don ou r seene & vouched as by the said former Indenture bear- 
ing date the said xxx th of lanuarie in the xxv th yeare of o r Reigne 
is limitted & appointed to be don for the moneys of sylver therein 
mencioned. And that aswell we o r selues, as alsoe the Gou r no r 
& Companie of m r chauntf of London trading into the East Indies 
shall haue & inioye all & all manner such & as ample lifcties 
benefittf & Advantages to all intentf & purposes for and con- 
cerning the said fower new moneys of sylver soe newlie to be 
made strocken & Coyned by force of theis present^ and eu r y of 
them respectiuelie, rateablelie & pportionablie as we or they 
should might or ought to haue by the intent & true meaninge 
of the said former Indentures for the moneys of sylver therein 
mencioned. And that the said wardens, M rs , & all and euery of 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 17 

o r said Officers of o r said Mynte shall in all thingf 3 doe & pforme 
& cause to be don and ^formed for & concerning the said ffower 
moneys soe newlie to be made stricken & Coyned by force of 
theis presentf as well toward^ vs as toward^ euery of o r said 
m r chaunt, all & all manner matters & thingf whatsoeuer, w ch 
ought to be any way don or pformed by them or any of them, by 
their or any of their meanes by vertue of the said former Inden- 
ture for or concerning the moneys of Sylver therein mencioned & 
according to the true intent & meaneing of the same Indentures. 

AND inasmuch as o r pleasure is, that diligent expedicon be 
had & don in that behalfe : We Will & Comaund you & eu r y of 
you to whome yt shall appertaine that from henceforth w tl1 all 
diligence from tyme to tyme vntill such tyme as we declare vnto 
you the said Warden, m rs , woorkers Comptrollers & other Officers 
& Ministers of o r Mynte o r pleasure in writeing to the contrarie 
you doe make stricke Coyne and printe, or cause to be made, 
stricken Coyned & printed, into the said moneys soe newlie to be 
made stricken & Coyned by force of theis present^. All such 
Bullion plate sylver in masse or otherwyse as shall be deliuered 
vnto yo r handf according to the true intent and meaning of theis 
present^ by a ^ticular Warrant to be signed by vs, or directed or 
subscribed w th the names of three of o r privie Councello rs for the 
tyme being att the least whereof the Lord Thref for the tyme 
being to be one. 

AND THE same moneys soe made stricken & Coyned to 
deliuer or cause to be deliuered to the Gou r no r and Companie of 
m r chaunt of London trading into the East Indies that shall 
bringe in the same their Attornes & deputies in such Convenient 
tyme & in such manner and forme as by the said Indentures for 
the moneys therein expressed is lymitted & appointed. And theis 
o r ires Pattentf w th the said warrant soe signed or directed as 
aforesaid for yo r workeinge of o r moneys in manner & forme aboue 
specified shall be aswell to you o r said warden m rs and workers of 
our said moneys, as alsoe to all & singuler other o r Officers in o r 
said Mynte yo r deputie or deputies sufficient warrant & cleare 
dischardge in this behalfe, any Couenante, graunt, article, clause, 
or agreem* had made or exspressed in the said Indentures beare- 
inge date the xxx th day of lanuarie in the xxv th yeare of o r reigne 

C 




1 8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

betweene vs on thone pte, & the said Richard Martyn knight on 
thother parte, or any other Acte, Statute, Ordinance or pmyse 
had or made to the Contrarie heareof in any manner of wyse 
notw th standinge. In Witnes wheareof &c : 



JHEAREAS 1 you the severall gsons herevnder named 
haue beene divers tymes required to bringe in yo r 
promysed Contribucons towardes the settinge forth of 
the East India voyadge, and haue not yett donne the 
same, we doe eftsoones requier you to giue yo r direct aunsweare 
whether you will bringe into one of the Thrers of the 
Companie yo 1 ' said Contribucons or not (yf not) then 
accordinge to your warrant of the ftf of her Ma til ' 3 privie Councell 
to vs in that behalfe geaven 2 we require you to repaire to the 
Courte and yeald to their Lo p8 a reason of yo r refusall, and yf you 
will assent to paie yo r Contribucons then to repaire to me the 
Gouerno r of y e Companie and to giue yo r worde for the present 
payment of the same dated the 22 th of April 1601. 

Richard Champion 3 Robert Pennington 

Hugh Hamersley 4 Richard Hearne 

1 " It is ordered at this Assemblie that a Warraunt shalbe sent to the persons 
" heervnder named that have hetherto denyed to bringe in ther Contributions, 
" subscribed under the hand of the Governo r and 4 of the Comitties w ch warraunt 
" shalbe shewed vnto them by a Pursevant to thend that vppon ther refusall to pay 
" they may be carried before the LL : or els vppon ther assent to pay they may be 
" appointed to come to M r Governo r to geave ther Wordes to pay the same to the 

" Threr the teno r of w ch warraunt doeth followe in these words videlt : " (Court 

Minutes, 22nd April, 1601). This measure seems to have had the desired effect, for only 
in three cases was it found necessary to " convent " the defaulters before the Council. 
One of these, Hugh Hamersley, made his peace with the Company and paid in his 
subscription ; the other two, John Bate and Robert Bowyer, were disfranchised. 

2 See page 12. 

3 These are the names of the persons to whom the warrant was addressed. 

4 Afterwards became a prominent member of the Company, serving as a "com- 
mittee" for a considerable number of years; and was nominated, but unsuccessfully, 
for the post of governor on the death of Sir William Haliday in 1624. He was 
Sheriff in 1619, and Lord Mayor in 1628 ; and was for some time governor of the 
Levant Company. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 19 

Wiftm Kellett Wiftm Palmer 

Wiftm Barrett Robert Myldmay 

Earth : Huggett 1 John Bate 

Peter Helinge Robert Bowyer 



JLIZABETH 2 by the grace of God Queene of England 
ffraunce & Ireland defendo r of the faith &c : To the 
greate and mightie kinge of 

Whearas almightie God in his infinite and vnsearch- 
able wisedome and gratious providence hath soe disposed of his 
Aiettertothekmges blessing? and of the good thing? of this world 
of the East indies. crea ted and ordayned for thuse of man, that the 
same how ever they be brought forth & doe either originallie 
growe and are gathered, or otherwyse Composed & made some 
in [one] Countrie and some in another : yet are they by the 
Industrie of man directed by the hand of God dispersed and sent 
out into all the partes of the world, that his wonderfull bountie in 
his Creatures may appeare vnto all N aeons, his Maiestie haueing 
soe ordaned that noe one place should inioye (as the Natiue Como- 
dities thereof) all thing? apptayninge to mans vse, but that one 
Countrie should haue need of another, & out of the aboundance of 
the ffruit? w ch some region enioyeth the necessities or want? of 
another should be supplied : By w ch meanes men of seu r all & 

1 Consul at Aleppo circa 1611-14. I n a letter to the Company in August, 1613, 
he expresses his desire to do them service, "being a freeman of their charter though 
no adventurer" (0. C. 109). 

2 On the 4th Dec. 1600, it was ordered that " m' Staper Capten Lancaster m r Tho. 
" Allabaster and Richard Wright shall conferre together touching suche Ires as shalbe 
" solicited from her ma ie to suche princes and Potentates as are in the places of the 
" Este wher trade shalbe sought ;" and on the I2th Feb. 1601, a warrant was passed for 
the payment to " M r W m Segar one of the herraults for the wry ting of her ma es Lres 
" to the kinges of the East Indies the some of xiij 11 vj s viij d and xij d for a boxe bought 
" by him to putt in the same Ires." From another entry we learn that there were 
six of these letters taken out in the first voyage. They seem to have been in identical 
terms, with a blank left for the factors to fill in the name of the particular king to 
whom the letter was to be delivered. It will be seen that the text now given differs 
slightly from that printed in Bruce's Annals, vol. I, pp. 147-150, but the variations 
are of no importance, 

C I 



20 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

ffar remote Countries haue comerce and traffique one w tb another, 
& by their interchandge of Comodities are lincked together in 
amitie & freindshipp. 

THIS CONSIDEration most noble kinge, together w th the 
ho : reporte of yo r ma tie for the well entertayninge of Straungers 
that visitt yo r Country in loue & peace w th lawfull traffique of 
Marchandize, haue moued vs to giue licence to diuers o r Subiectf 
who haue beene stirred vpp w th a desier by a longe and daungerous 
Navigacon to finde out & visitt yo r Territories & dominions being 
famous in theis pt of the world for honorable m r chandizeing, & to 
Offer you Comerce and traffique in buying bartering and enter- 
chandgeing of Comodities w th yo r people according to the Course 
of m r chaunt w ch Commerce and enterchandging, yf yo r [ma tie ] 
shall accept of & shall receiue & entertayne o r marchauntf w th 
favo r according to the hope that gaue them encouragm* to attempt 
soe long and daungerous a voiadge you shall finde them a people 
in their dealing & Conversacon of that Justice & Ciuillitie that you 
shall not mislike of their repaire to yo r dominions, & vpon furder 
Conference & inquisicon had w th them both of the kindf of their 
m r chandize brought in their shipps and of other necessarie Comodi- 
ties w ch o r dominions may afford : yt may appeare to yo r Ma tie that by 
their meanes you may be furnished in their next retourne into yo r 
portf in better sorte then you haue beene heretofore supplied, 
either by the Spaniard or Portugall, who of all other N aeons in the 
partf of Europe haue onelie hitherto frequented yo r Countrie w th 
trade of m r chandize & haue been the onelie ympedim^ both to 
o r subiectf and diuers other Marchaunt^ in the partf of Europe 
that they haue not hitherto visited yo r Countrie w th trade, whilest 
the said Portugalls p r tended them selues to be the souereigne Lordf 
& Prince of all yo r Territories, & gaue yt out that the held yo r 
Nacon & people as Subiectf to them : & in their stiles and Titles 
doe write them selues kingf of the East Indies. 

AND yf yo r ma tie shall in yo r princelie ffavo r accept w th good 
likeing this repaire of o r nVchauntf vnto yo r Countries, resort- 
ing thither in peaceable traffique & shall intertaine this their 
first voyadge as an introduccon to a furder Continuance of League 
and freindshipp betweene yo r ma tie & vs & of Comerce & enter- 
course betweene yo r subiectf & ours We haue geven Order to this 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 21 

o* principall Marchaunt (yf yo r Ma tie should be pleased there w th ) to 
leaue in yo r Countrie some such of o r said Marchauntf as he shall 
make choice of to recide in yo r dominions vnder yo r princelie & 
saffe pteccon vntill the retourne of another ffleete, w ch we shall 
send vnto you, who may in the meane tyme learne the languadge 
of yo r Countrie & applie their behavier as yt may best sorte to so 
Converce w t]l yo r ma ties subiectf to thend that Amitie and freind- 
shipp being intertayned and begunn, the same may the better be 
Contynued when o r People shalbe instructed how to direct them- 
selues according to the ffashions of yo r Countrie. 

AND because in the Consideracon of the entertayning of 
Amytie & freindshipp in the establishinge of enterco r se to be con- 
tynued betweene vs there may be required on yo r ma^ behalfe 
such promyse or capitulacon to be pformed by vs, w ch we cannot 
in theis o r ires take knowledge of, We therefore pray yo r Ma tie to 
giue eare therein to this bearer and to giue him Creditt in what- 
soeu 1 ' he shall pmyse or vndertake in o r name concerning o r Amitie 
& entercourse w ch promyse we for o r ptf in the worde of a Prince 
will see ^formed & will be redie gratefullie to requite any loue 
kindnes, or fauo r that o r Subiectf shall receiue at yo r Ma*f handf . 
Praying yo r ma tie for o r better satisfaccon of yo r kinde acceptaunce 
of this o r loue & amitie Offered yo r highnes you would by this 
bearer giue testimonie thereof by yo r princelie ires directed vnto 
vs, w ch shall giue vs greate & wonderfull Contente And 

thus &c. 



ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT 1 indented [and] made betweene 

the Gou r no r and Companie of m r chauntf of London trading 

to the East Indies on the one pte and George Waymouth of 

in the Countie of marriner on the 

other pte the daie of Aprill 1602. 

1 George Waymouth was despatched by the Company in May 1602, to discover a 
passage to India "by the way of the Norwest." The voyage ended in ignominious 
failure, the vessels returning after having got no further than the south of Greenland. 
See The Dawn, of British Trade to the East Indies, Preface, pp. xvi.-xxii. 



22 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 




the said Gou r no r and Companie of the 
m r chaunte of London trading into the East Indies 
vpon greate deliberacon had & taken of the longe & 
tedious course w ch hath been hitherto houlden by all 
such as doe trade or sayle from theis t of the world into the 
East Indies alonge the Coaste of Europe and Africa by the Cape 
of Bona Esperansa and of the greate Aduentures w ch are borne in 
soe longe a voyadge by many kindes of daungers offered therein 
& beinge moued w th greate hope that there is a possibilitie of 
discou r y of a neerer passadge into the said East Indies by Seas 
by the way of the Norwest yf the same were vndertaken by a 
man of knowledge in Navigacon and of a resolucon to put in 
execucon all possibilitie of industrie & valo r of the atteyninge of 
soe inestimable benefitt to his natiue Countrie & his owne ppetuall 
hono r Haue to that end enterteyned the saide George Waymouth 
aman in their opinion qualified & ffitt to vndertake and attempt 
the pformance of this discouerie vnto whome they haue deliu r ed 
beforehand the some of One hundred poundf to furnish himselfe 
w th Conveient instrum^ of Navigacon accordinge to his owne 
choyse & vnto whose direccon the haue comitted two shipps 
the one called the Discou r y the other the Godspeede being 
manned victualled prepared and ffurnished w th all thingf 
necessarie and convenient for such a voyadge and theirin 
bestowed and supplied all kindf of provisions according to 
his owne desier, whereby both the said George Waymouth 
and his Companie are prouided of victualls apparell and 
furniture for the space of 16 monnethes and haue alsoe Laden 
abourd the said shippes a Convenient pporcon of seu r all kindf 
of m r chandize. In Consideracon whereof yt is agreed 
betweene the said pties to theis present in manner & forme 
following on the other side. 

THE said George Waymouth doth promyse couenante and 
agree to and with the said Gou r no r and Company of the nVchauntf 
The covenantes ^ London tradinge into the East Indies that he 
agreed vpon viz. anc j n j s Companie shall and will be redie by the 
daye of next ensueing the date hereof 

to departe from the porte of London and as wynd and weather 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 23 

Way: & w in pmitt shall & will directlie sayle toward^ the 

hisComp:tosayleto- " 

wardesffrctam bavis Coaste of Groineland into that pte of the Seas w ch 

& soe forward by the 

d V om e o t f to ca h tayi n fr * s discribed in sundry general! Mapps by the name 
Sde n of Am h erica! cke " of ^retain Davis and shall passe on forwarde in 

those Seas by the Norwest or as he shall finde the 
passadge best to lye toward^ the partf or kingdomes of Cataya or 
China or the backe side of America w th out geueing ouer the pro- 
ceedinge on his Course soe longe as he shall finde those Seas or 
any pte thereof navigable and any possibilitie to make way or 

passadge thorough them And shall not him selfe 

not to retourne of . _ . . 

one whole yeare att retourne or voluntary suner any of his Compame 

the least. J 

to retourne backe agame vnto or toward^ the 
Coast of England for any lett or ympedim te whatsoeuer vntill he 
and they haue bestowed one yeare att the least from the tyme 
of their depture hence in going forward seeking sounding and 
attemptinge the pforme of this intended viage. 

AND further the said George Waymouth doth promyse 

graunte and agree to and w th the said Gou r no r and Company that 

he the said George Waymouth shall and will not onelie well 

enterteine & intreate : but alsoe quietlie pmitt and suffer such 

marchauntf or Pursars as the said Gouerno r & 

Tolleracon of such , -, . ,1 

asyecompanieshaii Compame shall place or appointe to goe in the 

appointe to keepe ... 

Registers of the said shipps or either of them, to keepe a register 

goodes&observacons 11- 

of their P roceedinges and accompt of all such goodes wares m r chandizes 

in the voyadge. .. f r t * * * * 

pvision and furniture as are shipped and Laden in 
any the said shipps how the same is bestowed bartered chandged 
spent or otherwyse disposed & alsoe to keepe an Accompte of all 
other things that shall be bought bartered exchandged or receiued 
in Lewe of any thinge that shall be sold or made away & alsoe to 
make notf lournalls & observacons in writeing of their Continuall 
pceedingf in the said viadge vntill their retourne for England for 
the direccon & helpe of posteritie that shall be occasioned or 
willinge heereafter to make a new attempt vpon the same dis- 
couery. And further that he the said George Waymouth shall 
w th in 10 daies after his retourne into England whether he doe 
pforme the said discou r y or not w th out concealem* of any thinge 
A loumaii of their w ch he hath discou r ed in the viadge deliuer a 

declaracon in writinge vnder his hand vnto the 



24 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

panic by the capt : Gou r no r of the said Companie, or his deputie 

wthin jo dales after > * p * r < 

his retoume. contevneinge a reporte of all & eu r y his pceedingf 

in the viadge worthie of note or memory for the good of the 
Companie and for the helpe of such as shall be disposed heereafter 
to proceed in the same passadge, and shall be redie from tyme to 
tyme duringe the space of 40 daies after his arriuall & retourne to 
London vpon warninge and somons geven him in that behalfe to 
come before the Gou r no r & deputie of the said Company for the 
tyme being & the Comitties & such others of the Company as yt 
shall please the Gou r no r & dep : to call vnto them & shall trulie 
relate vnto them such thingf as passed in the said viadge whereof 
they or any of them shall desier to be enformed w th out denyall 
or refusall in that behalfe & shall not discouer the 

Not to discouer his .... 

proceedingcs in the sccreetf or course of his pceedmgf in the vyadge 

voyadge otherwyse 

then to the Gour no r to any other pson or psons whatsoeu 1 ' then to the 

& Company. J , * 

said Gou r no r deputie & Comitties. 

AND the said Gou r no r and Companie of the m r chaunt of 
London trading to the East Indies for them and their Successo" 
doe in consideracon of the premisses promyse couenant and agree 
to & w th the said Georg Waymouth to satisfie & pay vnto the said 

George Waymouth or his Assignes w th in ffortie 
saw ^caj: 'after daies after his retourne into England and after 
Sured c the said sufficient proofe and testimoniall by him made 

that he hath passed thorough the North west 
passadge into the East Indies and arriued at any porte w th in the 
dominions of the kingdomes of Cataya, China 1 , or Japan the some 
of ffiue hundred poundf of lawfull English money w th out fraude 
or Coven. 2 

AND lastlie the said George Waymouth doth promyse and 
The said ca P t doth agree that vnles in this intended viadge he shall 
San d h Jmaundes discou* & passe thorough the same Northwest 
JSneitokSgJyfte passadge & shall make sufficient proofe and giue 

good testimoniall that he hath passed through the 
same passadge and arriued in some parte of the East Indies in 

1 It will be noted that China and " Cataya " are spoken of as separate countries. 
See Report on the Old Records of the India Office (W. H. Allen & Co., 1891), page 168. 

2 Fraud or deceit, strictly an act of conspiracy between two or more persons to 
defraud others. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 2$ 

the dominions or kingdomes of Cataya China or one of them that 
then neyther he the said George Waymouth nor his Assignes 
shall or will demaund or requier of the said Gou r no r or Company 
or any of them any Salary wagf or rewarde for his viadge or 
travell in the discou r y of the said passadge in reguarde the said 
viadge was vndertaken by the said Gou r no r & Company ptelie by 
his pswacon and vpon his resolucon to adventure his travell & lyfe 
therein for the good of his Countrie to w ch his resolucon the said 
Companie were content to add the Aduenture of the setting forth 
of the viadge to their greate chardge. In Witnes &c : 




my hardest Comendacons : where [as] this 
inclosed peticon 1 hath beene exhibited to the kingf 
ma tie , his highnes finding that yt was a cause meerlie 
appteyninge to the Courte of Admiraltie referred the 
same vnto me to take order therein accordinglie, and forasmuch 
A ire from m r Doctor as there is an attachm* made out of the said 
Caesar to the Comp : Courte of Admiraltie vpon c r teyne goodf in 
yo r handf att the suite of the peticioners who exhibited 
the said peticon. Theis are therefore to praie & requier you to 
make staie of the said attached goodf in yo r hande vntill such 
time as the cause shall be examined by me accordinge to his 
ma ties Comaundm* or that you shall receiue further order from me 
touchinge the same Whereof requireing you not to faile I hartilie 
bid you ffarewell from the Courte of Wilton this 27 th of October 

1603. 

yo r verie loueing ffreind 

Julius Cczsar? 



1 Not entered ; but its contents may be gathered from the Company's answer on 
the next page. 

2 Mr., afterwards Sir, Julius Caesar, the son of a doctor of Italian extraction, who 
had settled in London, and had risen to notice as a Court physician, was appointed 
in 1583 judge of the Admiralty Court. Five years later he was admitted master of 
the chancery in ordinary, and in 1591 Elizabeth conferred on him the post of master 




FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

jIGHT wo 11 It maie please yo u to be aduerticed that we 
receiued a tre from yo r wo?: wherein was inclosed a 
peticon exhibited to his ma tie by the m r and Company 
of the Suzan one of the shipps latelie retourned from 
the East Indies, wherein the peticioners haue vntrulie sugested 
The Answeare to tohis ma tie that the East India ffleete weare loinctlie 
Doctor c*sars ire. and in one con i unct ion & tre of Marte vnder 
the greate scale of England aswell for Civill gouernm* as Reprisall 
bound for the East Indies, whereas indeede the same ffleete 
weare whollie and altogether set [out] for the discou r y and trade of 
Marchandize and to that end weare furnished w th diuers Natiue 
commodities of the Realme and other provisions fitt to procure 
and settle a trade in those gtf and all the Marriners w ch were 
ymployed in the said voyadge weare hired and intertayned for 
wagf by the Monneth as is vsuall in all m r chauntf voyagf. All 
w ch shipps were at the dispoticon & direccon of their Generall 
then M r lames Lancaster and sithence graced by his ma tie of a 
knight, who according to his Comission as generall Agent & 
directo r of this voyadge and intended trade did vpon his arrivall 
in the East Indies dispose and appointe the m r & Companie of the 
Suzan to goe in trade of m r chandize to a place called Pryamon 1 in 
the said Indies & frome thence to retourne directlie for England 
The Gen r all himselfe purposinge w th the other two shipps to visitt 
other partes of the said Indies and haueing notice of a Portugall 
Gallion that laye in the waye to those places which he intended to 

of requests. He was knighted by James I. on the aoth May, 1603. In 1606 he was 
made chancellor and under-treasurer of the exchequer, and in the following year was 
sworn of the Privy Council. Seven years later, he succeeded to the post of master 
of the rolls, for which he had long' been waiting ; and the rest of his life is one un- 
broken record of active state employment. He died i8th April, 1636, and was buried 
in the church of Great St. Helen's, Bishopsgate, where his monument may yet be 
seen. His legal knowledge appears to have been hardly adequate to the important 
posts he was called upon to fill, and this point did not escape the notice of his 
enemies; but even they were forced to admit the excellence of his private character. 
His charity was unbounded, and during his early career his generosity to impecu- 
nious suitors in his court was carried to an extent that threatened seriously to 
embarrass his own resources. He was Cecil's right-hand man at a time of great 
difficulty in regard to the national finances, and his whole career seems to have been 
that of a useful public servant. 

1 Priaman, a town on the west coast of Sumatra, north of Padang. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. i*J 

visitt as all the Marrino rs of his owne shipp, & of the other two 
shipps in Companie w th him were hired by the monneth to pforme 
a Marchauntf voyadge and weare not to attempt any enterprize 
of reprisall vnlesse they were spetiallie compounded w th all did 
then make a contract w th all the Marriners of the Redd Dragon, 
the Hecto r and the Assencon what shares the should haue in such 
prize as should be taken by them then in Consortshipp together, 
and afterwardes pceedinge in their voyadge did meete w th the said 
Gallion and did surprize her accordinglie. 1 By reson of w ch 
Contract the said Generall since his arrivall in England did 
satisfie and paie all the Marriners of the said 3 shipps present in 
that service such shares and allowances as by Composicon was 
agreed vpon betweene them together w th the monnethlie wage 
accordinge to their Continuance in the voyadge, w ch monnethlie 
wage the said m r & Marrino" of the Suzan according to the tyme 
of their being in the voyadge haue likewyse receiued, and being 
not present at the said service or enterprize for w ch a speciall 
Composicon & Consortshipp was made weare not to ptake in the 
said Composicon. And this we hope shall suffice to satisfie yo r 
wo p : y* theis men complaine w th out cause, and clayme an interest 
in that whereto y e2 haue noe colo r of right haueing alredie rec d 
their wagf according to agreem* for the wholl tyme of their 
ymploym* in the said voyadge. 




MY very hartie Comendacons Wheareas I am 
aduerticed by the Officers of the porte of London that 
there was entred in the name of you and the Company 
to the quantitie of 1030000 pound weight of pepp w ch 
was latelie taken out of those shipps come from the East Indies 3 

1 See Markham's Voyages of Sir James Lancaster (Hakluyt Society, 1877), p. 91. 

2 They. 

3 The pepper referred to is evidently that brought home by the ships of the First 
Voyage. The loss of the second Court Book prevents us from following in detail the 
course of events. 



*8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

sr e Thom h [ er smyfh wherein you weare Adventurers and haue (as 
Go^rno^&^comp: is a ffi rme d) howsed and laid vpp accordinglie, 
fforasmuch as noe pte or pcell of the said pepp 
is to be sold before his ma ties greate Masse of pepp now 
remayneing att Leaden Hall be first vttered and sold according 
to his ma ties good plesure in that behalfe signified & expressed 
in my late tres sent vnto the said Officers. I am therefore to 
will and requier you vppon yo r dutie and Allegeaunce to his 
ma tie to Certifie me forthw th y e seu r all names of them who 
weare in any sorte owners or interessed pties in the said pepp 
soe taken out & entered as aforesaid, and alsoe where the same 
doth now remayne to thend the sale thereof may be stayed 
and prevented till his highnes pepp be first vented & dis- 
posed of as appteyneth, ffor you are to knowe that his ma tie 
maie by vertue of his princelie p r rogatiue as his highnes hath 
beene advised by the learned ludgf of this Land & his owne 
counsell in the lawe iustlie staie the vent & vtterance of all other 
pepp vntill his owne be first sold & vttered & for yo r better satis- 
facon in this pointe yf you will reteyne and bringe yo r Councell 
to Winchester at the begininge of this terme you & the both 
shall be heard, and his ma tie3 Councell indifferentlie by the ludgf , 
& then I doubt not you will be well satisfied of his Ma ties lawfull 
power and prerogatiue in this behalfe Soe not doubtinge of yo r 
dew reguarde to be had herevnto I bidd yo u hartelie farewell, frome 
my howse att Horselie this 5 of Nouember 1603. 

Yo r loueing ffreind 

T: Buckhurst. 1 



|UR HUMBLE duties remembred. It may please yo r 
LOP : to be aduerticed that we haue accordinge to yo r 
ire here inclosed a note of the names of all such of o r 
Comp: as haue receiued into their hand^ any of the 
pepp w ch is retourned in o r shipps from the East Indies and doe 
humblie herew th informe yoMo?: That we vpon the comeing home 

1 Thomas Sackville, Lord Buckhurst, afterwards Earl of Dorset, Lord Treasurer, 
1599 to 1600. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 29 

being to paie vnto the Marriners re- 



ire y vij* of toumed in this vyadge for soe much dew vnto 

Nouember 1603. J o 

them the some of 30000 [ ] and haueing noe 
meanes by the vente of o r Comodities retourned to rayse any moneys 
towardes the paym te thereof by reason of the present contagion & 
mortalitie in the Cittie 1 After we had made tryall of makinge 3 vpp 
of moneys vppon the Creditt of men of best estate in the Cittie and 
could not obteyne yt at any rate weare driven to agree to devide the 
pepp amongst o r selues thereby to furnish every man w th some 
meanes to bringe in money towardes paym* of this greate some 
dew to the said Marrino 1 ' 3 and towardes the setting out of o r shipps 
againe to fetch home a good pte of goodes lefte in the Indies & 
such ffacto 1 ' 3 and Marriners as are left behinde in the Country 
W ch meanes yf it shalbe crossed by any restrainte that the 
Adventurers cannot vtter their pepp allotted vnto them after three 
yeares forbeareing of their moneys in this vyage herevpon will 
ffollowe the Clamo 1 ' of Marrino 1 ' 8 for not paym te of their wag a 
Cessinge and giueing ouer of a new voyadge to be sett forth, the 
losse of all the goodf w ch remayne in the East Indies to be fetcht 
home, and a losse of the Hues of agreate nomber of o r ffacto rs & 
Marriners left there with the princes of those ptf, w th whome they 
be left as pledgf for the retourne of o r shipps thither againe this 
yeare : We are right Hono : easilie pswaded w th out Contradiccon 
that his ma tie by his princelie prerogatiue may staie the vent & 
vtteraunce of o r pepp retourned but yf his ma tie shall vse his 
prerogatiue in this case o r trade standing in such extremitie, 
herevpon will likewyse ensue an vtter desisting & giueing ouer of 
a trade verie chardgable begonne verie likelie to haue proued 
beneficiall to o r Countrey & kingdome and disgrace fullie geven 
over w th the losse of the hues of soe many of his Ma tiea subiectf, 
w ch otherwyse might be made men of spetiall vse in this Comon 
wealth, haueing gaiened soe greate experience in trade & Navi- 
gacon. Besides yf the said Adventurers shall not be pmitted to 
make sale of the said pepp the Companie shall be depriued of 
meanes to paie his ma tie the custome of the said goodf w ch cometh 
to 5000 [ ] or their about whereof yt may please yo r Lo p : to 

1 The plague was then raging in London (see page 39). 
? A mistake for " taking " ? 



30 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

haue Consideracon and to afford vs the ffurtheraunce in o r busines 
after this greate discontinuance of traffique in this Cittie w ch may 
enable vs to doe service to his ma tie and Comon wealth in o r places 
and callyngf . And thus humblie releyinge vpon yo r Lo ps good 
favo r towardes vs Wee take o r leaue of yo r good Lo p : London 
the vij th of Nouember 1603. 




pvsed yo r ires I impted the effect thereof vnto 
my Lordes And as it is iust and convenient that all 
resonable reguarde be had towardes you, who w th 
soe greate chardge and adventure doe advaunce his 
ma tles Customes & vente the Comodities of the Realme and 
the s P ec i am 'e that such payrn'f as are of necessitie to 
LThrerto the Com- be made by you should w th yo r owne be satisfied (yf 
neither yo r present store of money nor yo r Credit 
be able otherwyse to dischardge the same w ch seemeth somewhat 
straunge to be soe [ )] , evensoe I doubt not but as you are wyse men 
and faithfull Subiectf to the Crowne and state, soe you will not be 
soe ^ciall to yo r priuate [good] as altogether to forgett the publicke 
w ch alwaies liueth in the ^son of o r kinge and Sou r eigne, and 
whose onelie prosperitie is the publicke wealth and benefitt of vs 
all. I maye not deny that many inconvenience & clamo rs are like 
enough to follow yf yo r Marriners should be vnsatisfied and an 
iniury to the kinge yf that his Customes should rest unpaied, but 
that there is noe way to satisfie the one and to paie the other but 
by this port sale of pepp soe ill for the kinge and (of all other the 
worst waye for yo r selues [ )] , that see I not any reason to beleeue 
but on the other side you alsoe must confesse that yf yo r pepp 
haue his sale before the kingf be vnterred 1 it will soe greatlie 
impeach his ma ties markett, as either his must abide a longe time 
vnsold, or being presentlie offered will ryse to his extreame losse. 
And what hugh paym^ the kinge hath now to make (whereof a 
good portion might by agood sale ofhis highnes pepp be dis- 
chardged) & what Clamo" & Complaint^ are daylie are made by 

A mistake for " uttered " ? 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 31 

those to whome moneys are dewe & w ch by reason of this generall 
Contagion (his ma ties Rente Customes, debtf ffifteenes & subsidies 
being not paied) cannot possibly by his ma tie be dischardged of all 
w ch Clamo rs and inconvenience thus falling likewyse vpon theis 
affaires of his ma tie you must yf you will be indifferent 1 haue sence 
and feelinge of theis distasters of the kinge as of yo r owne 
Wherefore to conclude the matter beinge of such importaunce 
both towardf his ma tie and yo r selues and the kinge highnes in his 
most gratious & respectiue goodnes towardes his subiectf being 
resolute to doe rioe mann wronge, & most desireous to releiue his 
owne estate in a dew co r se of right & Justice, and yet w th as little 
losse as may be effected for you, I am vpon theis ground^ wished 
by my Lordf first to requier you to staie sale of yo r pepp vntill 
such order therein may be taken as may be both w th out preiudice 
to his ma tic , and to yo 1 ' good satisfaccon besides. And next that 
since the effectinge hereof requiereth a speedie resolucon, that 
therefore you doe forthw th send hither to Winchester nowe while 
the lodf : in respect of theis arraignem^ doe tarry heare a couple 
of discreete psons, or moe yf you soe thinke good who may be 
both authorised and instructed by you to debate deale and 
conclude for and on yo r behalfe, w th such of the Lordes as by his 
ma tie shall be likewyse aucthorised therevnto. And soe eftsoones 
prayinge you to doe y* w th all speede possible for that the llf come 
hither the 14 th daie & heere tarrie the 15 16 17 18 & on the 
Satterdaie being the 19 retourne to the Courte & on the 21 22 * 
remayne att Winchester againe. Soe as w th in the Compasse of 
this tyme theis psons insteucted & authorized must come. 
And soe I end w th all hartie well wishinge vnto you Winchester? 



1 Impartial, just ; as in the prayer in the English Church Liturgy, " that they 
" may truly and indifferently minister justice." 

2 There is no signature, but the reply shows that Lord Buckhurst was the writer, 
and also supplies the date, 




FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

|lGHT Hon: and my verie good Lo: vpon the receipte 
of yo r hono ire of the xiij th present, I caused a meete- 
ing of soe many of the nVchauntf Comitties & traders 
into the East Indies as weare p r sent to be found w th in 
the Cittie & ympted vnto them yo r hono" pleasure w th the sight of 

TheComp:aunswere Y * tr6 but nOt beill g able at the present to finde 

to the L. Threw ire. soe man y as might giue warrauntf for the sending 
of such men w th Comission to Winchester as yt pleaseth yo r Lo : 
to Comaund to giue their attendaunce vpon you and the rest of 
the Lordf did determyne w th all speede to send into the Country 
being nigh vnto the Cittie for such Comitties as are absent to 
make their repaier. and soe we are most humbly to craue yo r hono r 
ffavo r to pdon vs till we should be able to meete together and then 
p r sent order shall be taken for that such men may be sent as yt 
pleaseth yo r Lo? : to wryte for w dl shall be w th in the appoynted 
tyme lymitted in yo r Hono" tre all the Aduenturers relying vpon 
yo r LQP S good favo r toward^ them And soe I humblie take my 
leaue of yo r good Lo p : London the 15 th of Nouember 1603. 

yo r Lo ps most humble 
att Comaund Th: 



Bramley. 



1 Mr. Thomas Bramley was at this time Deputy Governor of the Company, having 
been chosen to succeed Mr. William Romney (see page 46) in that post on the 26th 
January, 1603. 

The following extract from the Calendar of Staff Papers, E. Indies, 1513-1616, p. 139. 
continues the story : 

" 1603, 18 Nov. London. Thos. Alabaster to Sec. Cecil. M r Bramley and M r Cham- 
" bers sent by the East India Company to Court, through a letter from the Lord 
"Treasurer, about liberty for sale of their pepper, which it seemed he would stay, 
" unless they would buy the King's, or it were otherwise sold ; the Company will give 
" in their reasons. Intreats his favour towards them ; the extreme scarcity of money 
"prevents them buying it." (Extract from Domestic Corresp., Jac. I,, Vol. IV., no. 86, 
Cat., p. 54.) 

The correspondence is continued on page 42, 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 33 

S r IAMES Lancasters remembrauncf left in the 
East Indies. 1 

|lRSTE as soone as I am gone you shall pcure from the 
m r chaunt resident heare yo r ladeing of such and soe 
much goodf as they shall appointe you and by all 
meanes after you haue taken them in pcure such 
pvisions that they may be kept drie, for a little wett bringeth 
A Remembrance for in theis gfoodf much damadge. I doubt not you 

M>- Keche mr of the . , _ . , . 

pinnace. will be carefull in this pointe. 

YO r ladeing being rec d you are to take in m r Towerson 3 
Thomas Tudd 3 Wiftm Chase 4 & Thius Dobson 5 and then sale 
directlie for the Hand of Banda not touching in any place by 
the waie w th out greate cause & wheresoeu 1 you become trust 
none of the Indians for their bodies & soules be whollie treason 
and yt will be very daungerous to touch in any vnknowne place 
therefore avoied yt. 

WHEN god shall send you to Banda & [you] haue deliu r ed 
yo 1 ' m r chandizes yo u maie laie vpp yo r shipp and you and yo r men 



1 Before leaving Bantam on the return voyage, Lancaster arranged that the 
pinnace should make a trading voyage to the Moluccas and endeavour to settle a 
factory there. Accordingly on the 6th March, 1602/3, the pinnace set sail, but after 
battling for nearly two months against contrary winds, was forced to return with its 
object unaccomplished. 

2 Became in 1605 chief at Bantam, and held that post till December, 1608, when 
he went home as captain of the Dragon. In 1611 he commanded the Hector in the 
Eighth Voyage under Saris, returning to England two years later. The following year he 
married the widow of Captain Hawkins, and shortly after was admitted a freeman 
of the Company gratis, in recognition of his long service. In 1615 he applied to be 
entertained for another voyage, but was refused. Two years later we find both him 
and his wife at Surat, having apparently been permitted to take passage in one of the 
ships of Captain Pring's fleet. He returned to England with Sir Thomas Roe in 
1619, leaving his wife in India. In 1620 he was entertained as a principal factor for 
the Moluccas, and in the course of the voyage was placed in charge of the 
Lesser James until her arrival at Bantam. He was then sent to Amboyna to 
succeed George Muschamp as agent, and there, with nine of his fellow countrymen, 
he suffered torture and death at the hands of the Dutch in what is known as the 
Massacre of Amboyna, 27th Feb., 1622/3. 

3 Factor in the First Voyage ; died at Bantam, I4th April, 1604. 

4 Factor in the First Voyage ; died in 1603 while on the voyage to Banda in the 
pinnace. 

5 Died iyth July, 1603. 

P 



34 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

lie att the m r chaunt howse & assist them in their busines all that 
you cann, but I thinke yt good to looke to yo r shipp that she be 
not lost, but husband her soe that yf occasion should be proffered 
by any enymies a land you maie haue some helpe by her by 
the Sea. 

AS my trust is in you, assist the m r chauntf , and giue them all 
helpe for I haue placed you in the 4 th place w th them. In this 
pointe be verie carefull as I hope you will be & hereby I doe 
acknowledge to haue Consorted w th you from the j of febr 1602. 
for as longe as you shall be in the m r chaunt service for 8 U the 
monneth. Thus God send his blessinge upon yo u in all yo r 
affaires, in Bantam this 12 of ffebr 1602. 



AS sone as o r shipps be dispatched from hence w th as much 

Convenient speede as may be made, I would haue you to 

dispatch the Pinnace for the Moloccos to the 

A Remembraunce 

r mrS i arkie o Tho i Hand of Banda & lade in her of all sortf of 

Morgan & mr Scott. 1 

Comodities as you can learne to be vented there, 
onelie keepe yo r narrowe & mallacoe ffardf : to furnish you here 
as yo r most staple Comodities to trust vnto, you may lade in 
her some 60 ffardells, the most of blewes & checkered stufff, 
some fine Pinthadoes, & some store of Corse, some of yo r Sian 
rowles : but not many, & some white Cloth & some browne & 
some of yo r stufff, that be Checkered, in all theis thingf vse yo r 
good ludgmV onelie lett them be well furnished. 

ALSOE lade in her 5oo R of 8 att the least for yt may chaunce 
they maie haue neede to vse some money. 

THE next business that most importeth is yo r dispatch of yo r 
howse yf yo u could sett forward the one in dispatching the other 



1 Morgan died 26th April, 1603, and Starkie on the 3oth June following. Edmond 
Scott lived to come home with Sir Henry Middleton in the Second Voyage, and to write 
an interesting account of the early years of the English settlement at Bantam, which 
is printed in Purchas. In July, 1608, he was elected a committee, but was removed on 
the z8th March, 1609, " for his public abuse of William Harrison on the Exchange." 
Then followed a wrangle with the Company as to moneys due to him, which was 
referred to arbitration but apparently without satisfactorily disposing of the 
matter. In 1619 he was made an auditor of the Company, and this is the last notice 
that can be traced of him. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 35 

yt would doe very well, onelie haue this reguard in the building 
theis yt be as free from fire as chardge will make yt. 

FFOR the sales of yo r Comodities, you must vse yo r owne 
discrecons alwaies holdinge this in mynde the tyme of the comeing 
of o r shipps and [procure] 20,000 bagg? of pepp as neere as you cann 
to be in readynes agayst their comeing and asmuch money as will 
dispatch them here of chardgf for this next accompte, I will not 
haua willinglie to be mingled w th any other, If yt please god to send 
me home I will wryte to you att lardge aboute this pointe for yt will 
ymport vs that are ymployed in this busines, myne opinion is to 
putt yo r selues out of Comodities as soone as you cann & putt yo r 
selues into pepps for in soe doinge you may chaunce to benefitt the 
Company in the defraying yo r chardgf for they shall be at aboue 
850 11 the yeare chardge in theis partf. 

WHEN you haue bought any store of pepp yf the Holland 
shipps come and the prise ryse you may take the benefitt & sell 
to the Companies most profiitt onelie haue a reguard not to be 
vnfurnished at the expectacon of o r shippinge. You haue the 
benefitt of 2 harvest f, I doubt not but you shall furnish the next 
shipps in good sorte. 

ALSOE I doe appointe you m r Wiftm Starkey to be head & 
cheefe Commaunder ou r all in this place but to take the Councell 
and advise of Thomas Morgan & m r Scott in all matters that the 
Companie may be the better assured of all things that passeth. 

AND yf yt please god [to lay his hand] vpon you m r Starkey 
& to take you out of this world I would haue you to giue ouer yo r 
chardge & accomptf to Tho: Morgan. And yf you Tho: Morgan 
die then to m r Scott, & yf you m r Scott then to whom you shall 
thinke moste meete, alwaies leaueing yo r thingf in the best 
manner you cann & the playnest. 

FOR such wagf as shall be due to men y* be here you may 
allowe yt by the yeare, or halfe yeare as you see mens necessities 
allwaies haue reguard that you be not necessited for want of money 
lett not to haue 1000 R of 8 at the least att all tymes by you. 

AND for the boyes lett them not waunt apparrell & necessaries 
that appteyne vnto them for soe they shall doe yo u better service 
Lett the Cookf boye be bound for 7 yeares & to haue the ffree- 
dome of London in his tyme accompte the 2 yeares y* he hath 
served in o r shippe. 

P I 



36 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

THUS I end desiering you to meete together in the Morningf 
& eueningf in prayer, god whom yee serve shall the better blesse 
you in all yo r affaires. Thus I wysh his blessing to be alwaies 
vpon you to p r serue and keepe you & to putt his feare in yo r 
hartf. Amen. 

FORGET not to husband yo r Comodities that there be 
nothinge spoyled nor come to decaye vnder yo r handf . 

ASSOONE as the Pynnace is laden by the m r chauntf 
resident here in Bantam of such and soe many ffardells of Cloothes 
A Rememmaunce for and Pynthados as they shall appointe yo u shall 
Sw^rsIn.w'-SaS; imbarke y r selues in her & by the helpe of 
and Thom : Dobson. ' m r Ketch & his Company saile directlie w th yo r 
said goodf for Banda vnlesse you touch in some place necessarie 
for yo r refreshing and make no longe stay and haue espetiall 
care of yo r saffetie and how you putt any man a land in any 
place for the people in those partes their wholle bodyes and 
mindf be all treason & therefore open yo r eyes in this behalfe. 

AND when god shall send you to Banda take a howse or 
howses for yo r busines as you shall thinke most ffitt for the Com- 
panies best proffitt and make sale of yo r Comodities alwaies 
advaunceing the price the best you may. 

IN yo r provision you shall make in Nutmeggf and maces haue 
you agreate care to receiue such as be good, for the smallest & 
Rotten nuttmegg^ be worth nothinge at home, soe that their 
ffraight and principall will be lost, of Maces the fayrest and best 
will be soonest sould and to best Rekoningf . 

ALSOE be carefull to gett together all the Cloues you can 
and vse all diligence to pcure some 60 or 80 Tonns att the 
least & the rest of Nutmeggf & maces. All theis thingf must 
be carefullie husbanded w ch you must haue a spetiall reguard 
vnto. 

I MAKE accompte the Companie will fraight some 2 shipps 
for that place of the burthen of 600 Tonns more or lesse & there- 
fore haue a care to get their ladinge in tyme and aforehand, that 
yt may be redie by such tyme as the shipps be w th you w ch I hope 
will be Michaellmas come tweluemonneth or before, Yt doth 
greatlie ymporte you to be carefull and pcure ladinge, for this is 
yo r whole busines there & therefore ar yo u sent, 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 37 

ALSOE I would haue you to agree together loueinglie like 
sober men, for yo r owne discordes yf you suppress them not 
will be to the m r chaunt greate losse and hindrance and to yo r 
owne vndoing. Therefore Gou r ne yo r selues soe that there be noe 
brabbles amonge you for any cause. 

I HAUE appointed m r Ketch to be an assistant to you in you r 
busines and vse him as one of yo r selues ymploying him in yo r 
busines as you shall haue most neede. 

IF you send him to any place lett yt not be farr of & w th out 
daunger of enymies for I would not haue him farr from you what- 
soeu r should befall, neither will I haue y* he putt himselfe in 
any daunger. 

ALSOE I doe appointe Thomas Tudd to be cheef ffactor 
and principall and the rest to be at his Comaund in this busines, 
next him I appointe Gabriell Towerson, and next Gabr: Towerson 
Wm Chasse, & nex Wittm Chasse, Tho : Dobson, and you Tho : Tudd 
I would haue you to take councell of the rest in all this busines 
that eu r y mans advise may be geven to the benefitt of the 
voyadge. 

ALSOE my will is that yf yt please god to call you Thomas 
Tudd out of this world then Comitt the busines, and yo r place to 
m r Towerson and yf you Gabr : Towerson die Comitt yo r place to 
W ra Chasse, & yf yt fortune you Wtflm Chasse to die Comitt the 
ffactory to m r Ketch m r of the pinnace, and yf he doe chaunce to 
die lett him Comitt yt to Thomas Dobson. 

ALSOE I haue geven order to the ffacto rs heare to supplie 
you w th 500 royalls of 8 because we knowe not what neede you 
may haue, & haue a care to yo r money & dispose yt not till greate 
occasion serue. 

AND for the paying of yo r Companie their wagf, doe yt 
sparinglie & remitt soe much as you cann till their retourne, but 
when necessitie requireth rather doe yt in Comoditie then money 
yf you in yo r discrecons see such occasion. 

I WOULD haue you to paie noe wagf to Thomas the barber, 
and fitt him w th Clothes meete not to exceede in any thinge 
for he is an other mans prentise & seeketh onelie to wast his 
masters. 




3 8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

ALSOE I would haue you Tho : Tudd to keepe the Accomptf 
of all such busines as shall passe. 

p me 1 Tho: Tudd 
p Ga: Towerson 
p W m Chasse. 



LRES into the East Indies from the Company in December 1603. 

Laus dei in London the 2 of decemfc 1603. 

|FTER o r verie hartie Comendacons : yo r seu r all tres of 
the io th of Nouember & the i6 th of ffebruarie 1602 the 
one dated at Achem, the other att Bantam, we haue 
rec d w th the Accomptf therein mencioed, wheareby we 
doe pceaue the state of o r busines left vnder yo r chardge, whearein 
TO or ioeing freind we P^y God to blesse & prosp you, to thend w th 
STrchL^S: all good success & sane retourne that we may 
therew th Congratulate yo r comeing into yo r owne 
Country and more pticulerlie be informed of the state of the trade 
w th mutuall Conference w th yo u , then yt is possible we should be 
by the intercourse of o r tres. At yo r depture out of England you 
may remember the state of o r Countrie was troubled in the Cause 
of the deceassed Earle of Essex since whose death and yo r depture 
hence God hath taken away o r late Queene, & although therein 
he visited this kingdome w th a Capitall triall, yet he left vs not 
thereby in any garboile 2 or trouble, but instantlie vpon the death 
of the Queene, w th sollempne pclamacon first in diuers places in 
London & afterward^ in the seu r all Counties of the Realme was 

1 Lancaster's copy of these instructions (from which most probably the present 
copy was made), would have been signed in this way by the persons addressed, 
as an acknowledgment that they had made themselves acquainted with its contents. 
3 Tumult or uproar. 

11 Look here, and at thy sovereign leisure, read 
The garboils she awaked." (Antony &- Cleopatra, Act I, Sc, 3.) 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 39 

pclamed kinge of England lames the first before kinge of Scottf 
w th soe generall a Consent that noe oppoticon or question was 
once pticularlie made to the Contrarie, & theirby this kingdome 
soe peaceablie established that this wonderfull blessinge of god 
upon vs, was Admired by all the neighbo rs kingdomes adioyneinge : 
Notw th standinge since as tymes haue their chandgf and as god 
doth many tymes humble his people lest they should forgett them 
selues in prosperitie, yt hath pleased him to chastice this king- 
domes w th greate sicknes & mortalitie in diuers placf thereof 
espetiallie in the Cittie of London where there hath died betweene 
the 7 of December 1602 & the first of december 1603 . 38138 . 
people, w th in the Cittie of London & the liberties & subvrbes of 
the same, & as may appeare by the Bills of the weeklie reporte of 
people deceased their died in one weeke in the Cittie liberties & 
subvrbes 3385 psons by occasion of w ch mortalitie trade hath 
vtterlie ceased w th in the Cittie for almost this halfe yeare, & 
m r chauntf & all others of any estate and Accompt haue dented 
into the Countrie : yet now god be thanked, doe resorte vnto the 
Cittie againe the Contagion being well seased, soe as the nomber 
that now die of al diseases in the Cittie & subvrbs are aboute 200 
a weeke The w ch sicknes and Contagion, as yt hath pleased God 
in some good measure to abate soe we beseech him for his m r cies 
sake vtterlie to take away & remoue in his good tyme. And 
touching o r shipps they are all God be thanked retourned in 
saffetie, & their goodf in good Condicon, howsoeu r the tyme & 
greate quantitie of goodf of the same kinde brought from the 
Indies by the Hollenders yealdeth but slowe sale and vtteraunce 
of them. But we hope for better oportunities of sale when men 
may freelie and saffelie resorte to the Cittie. The meane while 
our trade being to be Continued & followed, we are preparing w th 
all speed e o r fower shipps to retourne againe to the Indies and to 
set forward in their voyadge, aboute 2 monnethes hence by godf 
assistaunce at the furdest, therefore doe vse the oportunitie of this 
Conveyaunce 1 to pray you to .pforme all care and expedicon that 
such lading as is or shall be prepared by the order of S v lames 
Lancaster our late generall left w th you att Bantam for the 

1 These letters were taken out by a Dutch fleet, which reached Bantam in 
December, 1604. 



40 FIRST LETTER BOOK Off 

reladeing of o r shipps homeward may be made redie that the 
shipps be not occasioned to staie for their ladeinge, and that you 
pvse dilligentlie his instruccon sent herew th , and that you will be 
carefull that the pepp Cloues & Nuttmeggf be well clensed of dust 
before the be laden abourd for the dustines of them besidf the 
pesteringe and chardginge of the shipp w th vnproffitable dust, the 
Comoditie is disgraced by the vncleannes of yt, and we are 
desirous that reguard be had as farr as possible may be, that the 
pepp be lardge and smooth & that the Nutmeggf be clensed from 
Rumps, & that noe Comoditie be brought from soe longe 
avoyadge, that shall not be cleane & Comend yt selfe. And thus 
much together w th yo r good care wherevpon we relie shall suffice 
for advise touching the p r paringe of the goodf to be retourned. 
And as conc r ning yo r pticular mocon wherein you referr yo r selfe 
to o r Conference w th m r Wiftms & Raph Allen, we purpose to take 
a tyme before the comeing away of o r shipps to Confer w th them 
therein before the comeinge away of o r shipps, who haue beene 
all this tyme of sicknes in the Countrie, & are not yett retourned 
to London. And thus for this time we forbeare any further to 
enlardge, onelie wishinge you both for yo r owne pticuler to haue a 
reguard to the climate wherein you Hue & soe to haue a care of 
yo r health, & to remember & admonish others that are w th you, 
to doe the like, & soe comend o r selues & all you and yo r busynes 
to the prouidence of God whoe guide you and yo r acorns in his 
feare Amen. 




o r hartie Comendacons. Yo rs of the 17 th of 
ffebruarie 1602 We haue rec d o r shipps being all 
retourned thankf be to God saffe & their goodf in 
good Condicon. The tyme heare by reason of agreat 
ind mortalitie & Contagion of the plaggue in diuers 
nt P^ces of the Realme, & espetiallie in the Cittie of 
Resident ag Bantam London hath beene verie vnses onable for trade all 

marchauntc & others of any accompt haueing 
depted the Cittie all the sommer in w ch tyme there died betweene 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 4 i 

the 17 th of December 1602 & the io th of December I6O3 1 to the 
nomber of 38138 psons w th in the Cittie liberties and subvrbs 
thereof, But god be thanked the Contagion is very well seased, & 
there dieth not now of all diseases aboue 200 a weeke whereas 
there died in one weeke this sommer to the nomber of 3385 ^sons 
& neare the nomber of 3000 dyvers weekes togither. Besidf this 
visitacon [God] tooke away vpon the 24 th of March last o r late 
Queene yet did he not leaue vs w th out a souereigne for even the 
same daie was proclamed o r kinge lames the first before kinge of 
Scottf whose proclamacon had noe one mouth that gaine said him, 
an entraunce and succession admired by all the kingdomes aboute 
vs, god blesse him & giue him a prosperous reigne ou r vs. The 
state of o r trade being by Codes prouidence thus prosperouslie 
begunn, & we purposeing by Code grace to retourne o 1 ' 4 shipps 
back agayne for the fetching home of the rest of o r goodf & to 
Continue furder trade into the ptf of the East Indies according to 
the ffactory begunn by o r Generall S r lames Lancaster we haue 
thought yt meete to giue you to vnderstand that o r shipps shall 
godwillinge be redie to departe hence att the furdest w th in theis 2 
rnonnethes, & therefore we pray [you] according to the direccon 
and remembraunce leftw th you by the said S r lames & nowrenued 
by him in his ires sent by this Conveyaunce, to prepare & make 
redie the goodf appointed for their retourne, that the shipps be 
not occasioned to stay longe vpon their ladeinge. And for such 
goodc as are prouided as pepp of the smoothest & lardgest sorte 
Cloues & NutmeggC we pray you to haue acare to dense them & 
free them as much as ys possible from dust & the nutmuggf from 
Rumps that the Comodities w dl shall be retourned be cleane, w ch 
doth much Comend the sale of them, & besidf yt doth free o r 
shipps of an vnpromtable burthen w cl1 would fill vpp the bulke that 
might bestowe in place there of Comoditie of value. You may 
conceiue our desier w ch is y* o r goodf be laid abourde cleane & in 
good Condicon wherein we referr o r selues to yo r care thereof. 
And for yo r mocon touching yo r entertaynem te and Continuance in 
o r ymploym* we would willinglie haue aunsweare[d] yo r desier by 
theis o r ires, but m r Kenton being by reason of the sicknes not 

1 These dates differ from those given in the preceding letter. 




42 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

yett retourned or setled in the Cittie we could not haue tyme to 
Conferr w th him therein, but must referr you vntill the comeing of 
o r shipps by w ch we will advise what hath passed in o r Conference 
in that matter And being desierous to giue you all good Contentm*, 
doe purpose to send you such provysion of Oile & wyne for yo r 
health & Comforte as you haue writt for. Praying you to be 
carefull of yo r selfe and to haue a reguard to the Quesines of that 
Clymate & aire. And soe wishing you all good successe in yo r 
busynes we Comitt you to God. 



(FTER 1 o r hartie Comendacons whereas there hath beene 
alredie proponed by me the L: Threr in the behalfe 
of the kingC ma tie to you the Gou r no r & Company of 
Aduenturers trading [into] the East Indies theis three 
thingf Ensuynge, first that although his ma tie by vertue of his 
princelie p r rogatiue maye lawfullie restraine the 

A Ire from the Lo : r . - 

Threr the last of sale of yo r pepp latehe brought frome the East 

Nouember 1603. J r rf- 

Indies vntill his owne Bulke & Masse of pepp now 
remaineing att Leaden Hall be first sold and vented, as by his 
ma tics learned Councell his highnes hath beene fullie resolved yet 
neu r thelesse such is his ma ties gratious favo 1 ' & inclinacon towardes 
you, haueing respect to yo r soe worthie Adventure made & greate 
Chardges susteyned in this last longe voyadge by you sett forth, 
soe much for the Hono 1 ' of his ma tie & the publique good of the 
Realme as he is pleased to forbeare the vsinge of his p v rogatiue 
for this tyme, & to omitt his owne proifitt to giue meanes of 
benefitt vnto you. Secondlie that there should be a ioynt sale of 
his ma ties pepp and a like quantitie of yo rs , & soe to be vttered & 
sold together equallie & not otherwyse. Thirdlie yf you should 
thereof mislike then you to buy his ma tics pepp at some reasonable 
rate to be agreed vpon. Now for as much as we vnderstand that 
like as you doe humblie and thankfullie acknowledge his ma ties 
greate favo r toward^ you, in not pressing his said prerogatiue 

For the previous correspondence see pp. 27-32, 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 43 

vpon you. Soe you haueing considered of the two other offers, 
you doe w th all humblenes and thankefullnes embrace the second, 
namelie to conioyne in sale w th his highnes being not able as you 
pretend to proceede w th the latter, w ch is to buy the whole, Theis 
are therefore to signifie vnto you that his Ma tie being informed of 
theis thingf , is well pleased to allow of yo r said choise namelie of 
a loynct sale aswell of his ma ties pepp as of yo rs in a pportionable 
quatitie together. And for the better accomplishing of the same 
aswell for the kingf benefitt as yo r owne behoofe, wee haue 
thought good to recomend the whole ordering and manageinge of 
this busines to yo r good diligences, Cares, & discrecons praying 
and requiring you to assemble yo r selues together, & to Consider 
of some such Course for the Carriadge of the same as may pro- 
duce good effect of some spedie & reasonable benefitt vnto both, 
ffor the ffurtheraunce of w dl wee thinke y* requisite first that 
there be an Inhibition gen r all that noe pepp should be brought 
into this kingdome, by either English or Straunger vntill the said 
pepp proportionablie agreed vpon as is aforesaid to be sold be 
first vented, Secondlie y* all such pepp as is alredie brought in 
either by Straungers or English out of the lowe Countries or from 
the straight^ should be sequestred lykewyse from sale. Thirdlie 
that a present Survey be made of all such pepp as you the 
Adventurers haue alreadie deliu r ed or shall deliu 1 ' vpon the 
diuident to pticular Adventures of yo r Company w th spetiall 
chardge that noe pte thereof be sold vntill his ma ties pte And yo 1 ' 8 
pportionablie be first vttered. Prouided alwayes that yt may be 
lawfull for any to transport pepp out of this Realme at their 
pleasure. And yt seemeth alsoe most iust & reasonable that strict 
order be taken w t]l the Grocers that they buye noe pepp but his 
ma ties and yo rs the same being whollsome & saleable pepp & to 
that end that a present surveie be made of such store & quantitie 
as the said grocers now haue vpon their handf . Theis pointf we 
haue thought ffitt to remember vnto you & that we maye w th all 
speede be adu r tised from you aswell of yo 1 ' opinion in theis thing^ 
as of such other matters whatsoeu 1 ' as you shall thinke requisite to 
be further added and deuised for the better accomplishinge of 
this service, whereof soe soone as we shall haue significacon we 
shall p r sentlie giue order for the speedie expedicon thereof as 



44 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



appteyneth Soe we bid you hartelie farewell from the Courte att 

Wilton the the last of Nouemfi. 1603. 

Yo r verie loueing freindf 

Suffolke Buckhurst E Worcester 

Cumfcland Devonshire W: Knollys 

HHoward Ro: Cecill E Wotton 

Stanhope I ffortescue I Popham 




hon : o r duties most humblie remembred : we 
haue accordinge to yo r Lo s : Commission to vs directed 
mett and Conferred together of some course to be 
taken touching the sale of his ma ties pepp & haue 
examined the meanes ppounded by yo r LL: [(] being pleased to 
forbeare to put in vre his ma tles p r rogatiue) how 

The Companies lt . , ... . . i 1 r i 

aunsweare to th : the said meanes will sorte w tu the sale of his 
ma tics pepp & vpholdinge of the Companie. W dl 
we finde must eyther stand or fall by such a moderacon as is to 
be carried herein, and fallinge into Consideracon of the first offer 
of favo r to the said Companie mencioned in yo r l ps Lres w ch was 
that a ioynct sale of his ma ties pepp w th a like quantitie of the 
Companies pepp should be vttered and sold to gether equallie & 
not otherwyse. Wee finde in the Examinacon of that Course 
theis pticuler ympedim^ followinge first agreate quantitie of the 
Companies pepp alredy disposed into many handc by a gen r al 
diuident agreed vpon amongst them selues before yo r 11 : Ires came 
to o r handf , besid^ other great quantities of pepp brought out of 
the lowe Countries and both of them soe passed from hand to 
hand from the m r chaunt to the Grocer & from the Grocer to the 
Chapman in the Countrey that by this meanes there is sufficient 
pepp alreadie deliu r ed out abroade in the Cittie and Countrie, to 
forbeare any further sale for one yeare att the least, soe as the 
vent of his ma tics pepp by a ioynt retayling sale w th the remaynder 
of the Companies pepp cann noe way advaunce any some of 
money in Convenient tyme to his ma ties vse, worthie the attending 
the Event of this course. W ch being soe then their resteth onelie 
the other meane w dl is the sale of the kingf pepp to the Com- 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 45 

panie, wherein we they Comitties on the said Companies behalfe 
doe humblie informe yo r ft that the said Companie haue vpon 
their handf alredie soe greate a masse of pepp, that allbeyt eu r y 
Adventurer thereof hath free lifttie for the bringing in of zoo 11 of 
money to take out vC u worth of pepper vpon his stocke to set 
forth a new voyadge to the East Indies to fetch home the re- 
maynder of their goodf there yet in reguard there is noe present 
sale thereof there is such drawing backe in pformeinge of this 
supplie that the voyadg hath not that expedicon w ch weare Con- 
venient. Wherevpon we thinke that soe many pticuler men of 
soe diuers condicon will hardlie be drawen to ingage them selues 
for their seu r all proporcons of their adventures to inlardg anie 
furder somes to buie a Comoditie that is like to lie soe longe vpon 
their handf . Vpon the Consideracon of w ch difficultie, and the 
vnlikeliehood that the Generallitie of the Companie will be drawen 
to enterteyne this bargaine, we thought yt not meete to call the 
Companie together to propound this mocon vnto them, least yt 
should not onelie receiue a deniall, but being a matter putt into 
soe many distasted humo rs would be hardlie receiued and spoken 
off. We therefore seing noe present course to be followed that 
would bringe forth either benefitt to his ma tie or the Company, 
though [t] ffitt to shewe to yo r hono rs vpon what ympedim^ we 
rest, desyreing to be furder directed herein. And we the Comitties 
for the Company doe humblie adu r tise yo r ft that yf the preparacon 
of the voyadge be any way crossed by vrging the gen r alitie w th 
further supplies of chardge, or hindring them in the vtteringe of 
their pepp diuided & to be devided amongst them before the 
deptinge of the ffleete w ch will be aboute the end of ffebruarie, the 
voyadge will whollie be ou r throwne w ch may by yo r Lo ps ffavo r be 
vphoulded both to the benefitt of the kinge and the good of the 
Comon wealth by this small tolleracon & the shipps being once 
sent away the Company will be redie in all dutie to submitt them 
selues to any Course that shall seeme beneficiall to his ma tie for 
the venting of his pepp. And thus humblie resting at yo r 11 
Comaundem* & service we take our leaue London the 8 th of 
Decemfc 1603. 

Yo r LoP" humble att Comaund 
W m Rider Thomas Smyth gou r no r 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 




Tho : Middleton W m Romeny 1 

Samu : Saltonested Tho : Bramley dep : 

Jo : Wolstonholme 2 Tho : Cordall. 



I AMES by the grace of God kinge of England Scotland 
ffraunce and Ireland defendo r of the faith &c : To 
the greate and mightie kinge of Bantam, & of the 
dominions & territories adioyning greetinge. Whereas 
the right of inheritaunce & possession of theis o r kingdomes of 
A ire from his matie England ffraunce & Ireland by the decease of o r 
tam he in ing the last ^ ate deare Sister of ffamous memory is discended 
MiddLton? Henrie v P on vs > & ioyned to o r other principalities & 
kingdomes w ch we form r lie enioyed, we being 
established & setled in the possession thereof haue received into 

1 William, afterwards Sir William, Romeny, or Romney, haberdasher, was one 
of the original adventurers, and in September, 1599, was appointed treasurer of the 
proposed voyage. He was named a committee in the patent, and at the beginning 
of 1601 was chosen Deputy Governor of the Company. Two years later, he resigned 
this post on being made an Alderman. He was Sheriff in 1603-4, an d in July, 1603, 
was knighted by King James. By the end of 1606, he had become Governor of the 
Company, but the actual date of his appointment is not known. His tenure of the 
post ended in July, 1607, when Sir Thomas Smyth became Governor. Romeny was 
nominated again in 1609, but was not elected. He died 25th April, 1611. 

2 John, afterwards Sir John, Wolstenholme, born in 1562, was a farmer of the 
customs, and a well-known merchant, being especially active in the promotion of 
voyages to the North-West. His name occurs in 1612 as a committee in the charter 
of incorporation of the Company of Merchants of London, discoverers of the North- 
West Passage ; and two years later he is mentioned as having, in conjunction with 
Sir Thomas Smyth, paid Wright, the mathematician, to deliver courses of lectures. 
He was an original member of the East India Company, and in 1619 was made a 
committee. In July, 1628, he was nominated for Governor, but excused himself. He 
died 25th Nov., 1639. 

3 Sir Henry Middleton, brother of David and John Middleton, was in the First 
Voyage a factor "of the second sort." At Acheen Lancaster made him captain of 
the Susan, and sent him to Priaman, whence he carried home a cargo of pepper. 
He commanded the Second Voyage, and was knighted on his return in 1606. Four 
years later, he took command of the Trades Increase as general of the Sixth 
Voyage, from which so much was hoped. Much time was wasted in the Red Sea, 
where, for a time, Middleton was a prisoner at Mocha ; and even after he had escaped 
and had carried his ships to Surat, he returned to exact compensation for the ill- 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 47 

o r hand? vpon the retourne of S r lames Lancaster & other of o r 
subiectf from yo r ma tie3 kingdomes & territories w th their shipps 
& marchandize, not onelie yo r Princelie ires directed and sent 
to o 1 ' said deceased Sister, but alsoe yo r kinde present w ch did 
accompanie the same holding o 1 ' selfe after her deaceased inter- 
ressed therein by the right of o r Crowne & Septer. Vpon the 
pvsall of w ch ires we weare possessed w th noe small ioye, that yo r 
ma tie had soe gratiouslie accepted the Comeing of o r subiectf into 
yo r dominions and kingdomes & soe fauorablie and Royallie delt 
w tlx them whilest they aboade & Contynued theare in traffique 
w th y r su biect : Of all w ch ffavo 1 ' 3 & other yo r ma tie3 princelie 
pceedingc w th them o r said subiectf, S r lames Lancaster hath 
made vnto vs verie lardge & ample relacon. This Introduccon 
being made into a mutuall amitie & entercourse betweene yo r 
ma tie & vs, we are desirous to Nourrish & Contynue the same by 
all good meanes and oportunities that may be thought vpon or 
conceiued on o r pte. And to that end we haue geven lycence to 
diu r s of o r subiectf to prepare & sett forth a new voyadge 
toward^ yo r Countries and kingdomes, amongest w ch manie 
of them w ch were in the former voyadge are desirous for the 
good & honorable vsadge they formerlie founde by yo r princelie 
favo r to visitt the same againe : others vpon their reporte are 
encouradged, notw tL standing the longe & daungerous Nauigacon 
to see the state & manner of behavio r of people in Countries farr 
remote. Theis Consideracons moueing both vs & o r Subiectf to 
visitt yo r ma ties Countries with lawfull & peaceable traffique of 
m r chandize, we doubt not but your ma tie will be well pleased 
therew th , & not onelie soe, but w th the Continuanc [e] of an enter- 
course from yeare to yeare of o r m r chaunt w th their shipps & 
goodf into yo r kingdomes ; whome we dare be bold to Comend to 

treatment previously received. After an ineffectual blockade of the Turkish ports, 
he was compelled to abandon his purpose, and sailed for Tecco, in Sumatra. Thence 
he proceeded to Bantam, from which port Downton was sent home with the 
Peppercorn. The Trades Increase, which had excited so much admiration at the 
time of her launch under royal auspices, was by this time worn out and leaky, and 
had to be beached at Bantam, where she was afterwards set on fire by the natives 
and completely destroyed. Middleton, who had remained at Bantam after Downton 's 
departure, died there on 24th May, 1613, worn out and " hartesore " at the ill-success 
of his expedition. 



48 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

yo r ma tic for a people Civill and iust in their dealeing and trade & 
euery way as able to furnish yo r ma tic & yo r people w th all such 
Comodities w ch this parte of the world doth yeald, or affordeth as 
any Nacon or people whatsoeu r w ch heretofore haue made trade or 
traffique w th yo r people. And because a Capitulacon & establishing 
of Amitie, [and] entercourse to be contynued betweene yo r ma tie 
and vs cannot convenientlie be pformed by discourse of ires o r 
seu r all kingdomes being so farr distant & remote thone from the 
other. We therefore pray yo r ma tie to giue eare therein to 
this bearer & to giue him Creditt in whatsoeu r he shall vndertake 
or promyse in o r name concerninge the same w ch we promyse 
for o r pte in the worde of a prince shall be pformed, and will 
be redie gratefullie to requite any loue kindnes or favo r that 
o r said Subiectf shall receiue at yo r ma ties handf . And in token 
of o r Princelie loue to yo r ma tie , we send you by this bearer a 
remembraunce & kindnes, w ch we pray you to accept as from one 
that wisheth vnto yo u all good successe, & happines. And soe 
Comend yo r ma tie to the tuicon of the most highe God. 

Note that the kinge writeth him not brother. And that 
another ire was now alsoe written from the kinge to some other 
Prince in those pt of The teno r of that form r lie from Queene 
Elizabeth. 1 



I AMES by the grace of God kinge of England Scotland 
ffraunce and Ireland defendo r of the faith &c : Trustie 
and welbeloued Henrie Middleton Esquier & to o r 
trustie and welbeloued xpofer Colthurst 2 Gentleman 
greetinge. Wheareas diuers of o r loueing subiectf att their owne 
Adventures Costes and chardges aswell for the 

A Comission from . _ , . T- i r i- i i r i 

his matie to sr Henry hono r ot this o r Kealme of England as for the 

Middleton tr^JO ri_j- 

encrease and advauncenr of trade & m r chandize 

1 See page 19. 

2 Commanded the Hector in the Second Voyage. At Bantam he was transferred to 
the Assertion, in which he made a successful voyage to Banda, and subsequently 
returned to England in company with the Dragon and Hector. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 49 

w th in the same did heeretofore sett forth a voyadge to the East 
Indies w th c r teyne shipps and Pynnacf by way of marchandizeinge, 
by w ch shipps & Pynnacf they haueing discou r ed and begun to 
settle a trade in some pte of the said East Indies. And their 
shipps being retourned from thence laden w th sundrie marchandize 
brought from those partes they the said m r chaunt intendinge to 
frequent those Countries of the East Indies by Continuing the 
trade alredie discou r ed and begon & endevo r inge further discou r y 
of trade of those partf for the more ample vent of the Natiue 
Cornodities of o r kingdomes, & retourninge from the places of 
their discou r y of such necessarie Comodities as shall be of spetiall 
vse & benefitt both to vs & o r subiectf are in hand to prepare 
and make redie their said shipps latelie retourned from the East 
Indies & and to sett them forth againe for a new voyadge. And 
wheareas the said m r chauntf haue chosen you the said Henrie 
Middleton to be principall Gou r no r , or Generall, and you the said 
xpofer Colthurst to be Leiuetenaunte Generall of all the m r chauntf 
Marriners and other o r subiectf w ch are or shall be shipped in 
any of the said shipps. We gratiouslie favo r ing their intended 
voyadge, & approueing & allowinge of their choyse of you to the 
said Gou r nm te being desierous to furnish you, w th all ffitt & Con- 
venient power & aucthoritie to rule & Gou r ne all & eu r y o r 
subiectf imployed in this voyadge by a due obedience to be by 
them yealded, vnto you in obserueing & executeinge of all such 
good orders & Constitutions as you shall thinke Convenient to 
ordeine & appointe for the ffurtheraunce of the said voyadge to 
the hono 1 ' of vs and o r kingdomes, & for the advauncem* of the 
said trade. We doe heereby straightlie chardge and Comaund all 
& eu r y pson & psons ymployed vsed or shipped in this voyadge, 
in any of the said ships, to giue all due obedience & respect vnto 
you dureing the said voyadge, & to beare them selues therein 
one towardes another in all good order & quietnes for avoideing 
any occasion that might breede Mutinie, quarrells or discention 
amongest them to the hindraunce of the good suckcess w cl1 is to 
be hoped for by Godf prouidence of the said intended voyadge, & 
in default of such dutie and obedience to be pformed towardes you 
& for the correccon & quenching of all such Mutenie quarrells 
or dissention, that shall or maye growe or be moued by the 

E 



5 o FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

disorder, euill dispoticon or pversnes of any of the said psons. 
We doe heereby aucthorize you Henrie Middleton Gen r all 
dureing the said voyadge or dureing soe longe tyme as you shall 
Hue in the said voyadge. And in Case of yo r decease w ch God 
forbid, we doe then likewyse hereby aucthorize you the said 
Christopher Colthurst to chastice correct and ponnish all 
Offenders and Transgresso rs in that behalfe according to the 
qualitie of their Offences w th such ponishm* as are Comonlie vsed 
in all Armyes by Sea when the offences are not capitall. And for 
Capitall Offences as wilfull murder w ch is hatefull in the sight of 
God, or mutenie w ch is an offence that maie tend to the ou r throue 
of the said voyadge, the same being trulie & iustlie proued agaynst 
any of the pson or psons aforesaied. We doe hereby giue vnto 
you the said Henrie Middleton during all the tyme of the said 
voyadge, or dureing soe long tyme as you shall Hue in the said 
voyadge. And in Case of yo r decease we doe giue to you 
Christopher Colthurst full power and aucthoritie to vse and putt 
in execution o r lawe called Martiall in that behalfe and theis o r 
tres shall be vnto you sufficient warrante and dischardge for the 
doing & executeinge of all & singuler the p r misses. And foras- 
much as at this present tyme wee are in Amitie w th all xptian 
People & are vnwilling that any of o r subiectf should giue 
occasion of breach or hindraunce of that league or Amitie w ch we 
hold w th any o r Confederate ffreindf or Allies and because we are 
not ignorant of the Emulacon and Envie that doth accompany 
the discou r y of Countries and trades, & of the quarrells and 
contencons w ch doe many tymes fall out betweene the subiectf 
of diu r s Princes y* meete the one w th the other in fforraine and 
ffarr remote Countries, in the Course & psecuteinge of their 
discou r ies, and being desirous y* o r subiectf should forbeare to 
moue or begin any quarrell or contencon vpon the subiectf of o r 
Confederate ffreindf or Allies either in the pceedinge or retourne 
vpon or from any of their voyage . Wee therefore doe hereby 
straightlie chardge & Comaund you Henrie Middleton & you 
xptofor Colthurst, & all others vnder yo r Gotfnm*, that neither in 
your voyadg outwarde or homeward nor in any Countrie Hand 
Porte or place where you shall abide or come during the tyme of 
yo r being abroade out of o r kingdomes or dominions where you 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 5' 

may meete w th any the subiectf of the kinge of Spaine or of any 
other of o r Confederate ffreinde or Allies, their shipps vessells 
goodf & m r chandize, you doe attempt or goe aboute to sett vpon 
take or surprise their psons shipps vessells goodf or m r chandize 
or offer any iniurie or discourtesie vnto them, vnlesse you shall 
first by them thearevnto iustlie be pvoked or driuen in the iust 
defence of yo r owne psons, yo r shipps vessells good? or nV'chandizes 
as you will Aunswere to the Contrarie at yo r vttermost pills. In 
witnes whereof we haue caused theis o 1 ' tres to be made Pattentf 
witnes o r selfe att Westminster the 3 daie of March in the first 
yeare of o r Reigne of England ffraunce & Ireland & of Scotland 
the Seaven & Thirteth. 



COMISSION sett downe by vs the Gou r no r the 
Deputie & Comitties of the East India Companie to 
o 1 ' loueing ffreindf m r Henrie Middleton Generall of the 
m r chauntf marrino 1 ' 3 & others ymployed by vs in this 
present intended voyadge, being o r second voyadge to the East 
Indies & to m r xptofer Colthurst, m 1 ' Roger Style 1 , m r Wiftm 
Kealinge 2 & m rs o 1 ' principall m r chauntf and ffacto 1 ' 3 in the said 
voyadge, & eu r r of them respectiuelie, as the direccons & 
instruccons of this o r p r sent Comission maye Concerne their 
seu r all places of trust wherein the are ymployed the w ch voyadge 
Almightie god in his mercie make prosperous. 

WHEAREAS we haue vpon a spetiall conceite of yo r 

1 Third factor on the Assertion in the First Voyage. Commanded the same ship in 
the Second Voyage, until Bantam was reached, when he was removed to the Hector. 
He died shortly after, in March, 1605. 

2 Commanded the Susan in the Second Voyage as far as Bantam, when he was 
removed to the Hector (upon the death of Styles) for the homeward voyage. Upon 
his return he was placed in command of the ships of the Third Voyage, the Dragon 
being his flag-ship. In 1615 he commanded another voyage on account of the First 
Joint Stock, upon an agreement that he was to remain chief commander in the Indies 
for five years (0. C. 369). He returned to England about two years later, and in 
1618 obtained the appointment of Captain of Cowes Castle. He died towards the 
end of 1620. 

E I 



52 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

wysedome, discrecon & good gou'nm 1 , made choyse of you m r 
Henrie Middleton to be principal! Gou r no r & Generall of o r ffleete 
& haue submitted to yo r Comaund the .psons of all the marchauntf 
Marriners & others ymployed in the seu r all shipps thereof w ch 
shipps we haue fitted and furnished w th all necessaries not onelie 
meete for the voyadge but such as you could require or wish to be 
supplied w th yo r full Contentm*. 

WEE therefore expect on yo r parte, such a pformaunce & 

carrying of this Gou r nm te Comitted to yo 1 ' Chardge 

The compa: in- as may not onelie Confirme vs in that hope and 

ducemt to make ' 



of theis good conceipt w ch induced vs to the choyse of yo u 
to this ymploym* but may add vnto yo r selfe an 
encrease & advancem* of yo 1 ' owne reputacon, w ch noe doubt you 
may effect, obserueing this moderacon in yo r said Gou r nm te soe to 
Comaund as you may be both loued and feared, not vsing 
aucthoritie to worke yo r private respect or revenge but studieing 
and endevo r inge to bringe this longe and Tedious voyadge to a 
pfitable end, w th care of the saffetie, health & Comforte of yo 1 ' 
people & vsing yo r industrie to recompence soe greate a Chardge 
of ^visions and other burthens and expences borne in 
this voyadge w th a pfitable retourne to the gen r all state of the 
Companie. 

AND that you may the better pceede in an vnfallable hope of 

agood yssue of yo r endevo 1 ' 8 we wish and exhorte 

Tovsetheassistaunce you first to depend ConfidentHe vpon Codes 

of ctaine nominated. "* * 

pvidence, & next ppound to yo r selfe the good 
example of yo 1 ' late p r dicesso r S r lames Lancaster in the carryinge 
of the former voyadge. And forasmuch as noe man is soe absolute 
in his Course and direccons for the manageing of any occasions of 
ymportaunce, but he May therein receiue light & espetiall helpe 
and furtheraunce by Conference w th others, Therefore we haue for 
yo r Assistaunce & helpe the better to vndergoe the Chardge of o r 
busines made choyse of m r xptofer Colthurst, m r Roger Style, 
m r Wiftm Keeleing, m r Robert Browne 1 & m r Edward Highlord, 2 

1 Left at Bantam by Middleton as second irf rank to Towerson. He appears to 
have returned to England at some date after March, 1610, and went out again in the 
Seventh Voyage with Captain Hippon. He died off Masulipatam, 8th Sept., 1611. 

2 Purser of the Red Dragon and afterwards of the Assertion in the First Voyage. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 53 

as o r principal! m r chaunt ymployed in this voyadge to be readie 
w th their advice & aide to assist you in any thinge that may 
belonge to the same whome we pray and requier you not onelie to 
heare but loueinglie & kindlie to vse and respect soe as by yo r 
kinde Conversacon mutuallie vsed & had the one w th the other 
there maye growe betweene yo u in soe firme a vnitie as shall be 
subiect to noe larr or distaste wherein yf you linke together, all 
thingf will passe w th felicitie and Contentm* otherwyse yf there 
fall amongst you Envie emulacon or disagreem* there is noe hope 
of good successe of the voyadge but apparant hazard to the ou 1 '- 
throw of the same. & this shall suffice for o r generall advise vnto 
you for such a moderacon of gou r nm te to be pformed on yo r te as 
may breede a good affeccon towardes you in those that are 
submitted vnto yo r Comaund. 

AND to thend that the wholle Companie Comitted to yo r 
3 chardg may pforme that due obedience & respect 

?sed e b? ra th e e r whoSe vnto you w ch is ffitt to be yealded to their Gou r no r 
or Generall, we doe herein ppound vnto you the 
care of the due execution of that principall meane w ch draweth all 
Christians to Conformitie and submission to such as are set ou r 
them w ch is the dayly invocacon & religious wo p : & service of God, 
requiring you to take order that c r teine houres & tymes in eu r y 
day may be sett aparte for publique prayer & calling vpon the 
name of God, that like orders w th penalties to be seu r elie published 
& sett vpp in eu r y shipp agaynst the blasphemeing of the name of 
god, & all Idle and filthie Comunicacon : That all vnlawfull 
gameinge especialie dice play may be abolished as that w ch 
pcureth not onelie the blasphemeing of the name of God, but 
Envie and quarrellinge frome whence many tymes pceedeth 
murders or att the least the impou r ishinge and vndoinge of many 
of the poore vngou r ned Marriners, who by the lifctie of dice playe 
loose their whole wages of the voyadge as yt is not vnknowne vnto 
you, by the practise of diuers in the last voyadge who to furnish 
them selues w th money in that vnthrifftie ymploym* ingaged them 
selues to pay 3 for I vpon their retourne, & thus haueing wasted 

He went out again in the succeeding expedition, and, while the ships were at Bantam, 
was promoted to the command of the Susan. This vessel foundered on her way 
home, and all on board perished. 



54 FIRST LETTER BOOK Ob 

their wag? by such vnthriftie meanes went aboute to laye a 
scandall vpon the Companie, alledgeing they were oppressed by 
necessitie in the voyadge to enter into those excessiue vsurious 
Content? 1 to mayntayne their Hues. 

YOU haueing thus sett an order to be obserued in eu r y shipp 

both for the service of God, & the Civill behavio r 
TO keepe com?-, one of the Company amongest them selues, then for 

the better Assistaunce strength & Comfort that 
the whole ffleete may take one of another by keeping Company 
together through out the wholle voyadge vntill you come into the 
East Indies into the porte or Haven of Bantam, where you are 
to take order w th the m rs & Companie of eu r y shipp by the best 
observacons & direccons w ch you shall in yo r Conference together 
agree vpon that you depte not out of sight one of another soe 
longe as you may possiblie keepe together to thend that yf any of 
you should be any way distressed vpon any occasion you may be 
releued and Comforted by the Assistaunce of some of yo r Consort? 
not being farr of. And yf you shall happen to be sedated by 
ffowle weather & cannot recouer the sight one of another in shorte 
tyme, yf yo r separacon or dispersinge happen to be before you 
come to Hand of May 2 then lett that Hand be the place of yo r 
repaier or rendevous, that you may be drawen agayne together 
in Companie & there to staie one for an other 7 or 8 daies, & 
haueing made staie there soe longe & the Company missing, not 
being Come thither, then to depte forwardes on the voyadge, 
leaueing some apparent marke behinde you that you haue beene 
at the said Hand, as by raysing some heape of Stones together, 
setting vpp of a stake or marke and leaueing there some Ire in or 
neare the place w ch may be found by them as shall come after, 
whereby they may knowe that the other shipp or shipps are past 
that place. And yf yo r seperacon be beyond the Hand of May 
then yo r Rendevous to be att the Hand of St Lawrence. And yf 
s you shall be occasioned to land in any place for 

k^'in'Srlng o5 fresh water, or to refresh yo r men yt shall behoue 

you to keepe good order, & discipline by warlike 
guarde for the saffetie of your Companie least they should be 
surprized and fall into daunger by ou r much Confidence and 

1 Contracts ? 2 Maio, one of the Cape Verd Islands. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 55 

securitie & the saffetie of yo r psons being pvided for then yo r 
wholle Companie to be admonished to behaue them selues peace- 
ably & Civillie towardes the people of that place, where you refresh 
for the supplie of yo r wantf, & that they be alsoe exhorted to a 
moderacon in feeding of fruitf & fresh victualls of that soyle, 
the w ch by their intemperate & vnmoderate dyet, may breede 
inconveniences formerlie found by experience to be the losse of 
many mens liues. And in such place or places of refreshing you 
shall doe well to giue spetiall order to some men chosen & 
appointed to that end, to make the gen r all pvision bot of ffresh 
victualls & fruite for the whole ffleete whereby an equall repar- 
tition thereof may be made for the Company of eu r y shipp and 
that eu r y one be not w th [out] lymitacon, to victuall hymselfe 
according to his intemperate appetite, and this order to be taken 
phibiting eu r y pson vpon payne of seveare ponishm te that they 
doe not raunge and straggle after fresh victualls and fruit C but 
by such order as shall be p r scribed vnto them. 

VPPON such oportunities of necessarie landinge of yo r 

6 people for refreshinge, w ch by noe meanes we would 

ing e n h pt ng to b be 1 vse d d haue otherwyse to be vsed vpon light occasion 

vpon light occasion. for ^ ^ ^jj greatHe hmder the voya d ge W66 

doe requier you to giue order vnto the preacher to prepare him 
selfe to preach to the people being Come together out of the 
seu r all shipps, makeing his choyse of such ffitt argum^ & places 
of scripture as may be most agreable to the tyme and occasion 
whereby the whole Company may be exhorted and taught the 
better to carrie themselues in the gen r all busynes. And that the 
preacher may haue the more Comforte in his mynistrie. we pray 
you be carefull that all due respect^ be geven him, not onelie by 
yo r selfe but by the wholle Company that his doctrine & exhor- 
tacons by Contempt or neglect of his mynistrie retourne not 
w th out proffitt. for the place of yo r refreshinge we wish yt to be 
the Hand of St Lawrence, but not at Saldania in any wyse for 
the inconveniences of that Hand noted vnto vs by men of good 
experience, & their causion geven vs to be ware of the daunger 
of that place wherefore we requier you to shun this place as o r 
expresse order & will herein. 

YOUR refreshing place being left & all oportunities taken 



56 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

TO g oe th'ence to * or thadmonishing of yo r people both to the 
of a Se & s . todispose service of God w th out w ch noe enterprize cann be 

prosperous and to the Civill & orderlie carryinge 
of them selues in the voyadge, & in all service thereto belongeinge 
they 1 you are to shape yo r Course directlie for Bantam 
aforesaid. Att w cb porte as soone as you shall arriue & that you 
may Convenientlie drawe yo r selues together in Conference w th 
m r Wiftm Starkey [or] the agent w ch you shall finde theare 
succeedinge him in the busines. Then we doe requier you as 
god hath guided & brought you to yo r expected & appointed 
porte, where you may enter into the disposeing of yo r busines, 
that then you being Come to the m r chaundizeing porte of the 
voyadge you doe pceede therein as followeth. Viz. 

WEE DOE will and require you m r Henrie Middleton o r 

Gou r no r or Gen r all of the whole voyadge, & you 
TO advice and Con- m 1 ' xptofer Colthurst, m r Roger Style, m r Wiftm 

place : 3 roadge& ail Kealinge, m r RoEt Browne & m r Edward High- 
other circumstances. .... , r i 1- 

lorde o r prmcipall nVchauntf for the disposeing 

of the m r chandises & traffique of yo r saide voyadge that you 
advise & Conferr together w th m 1 ' w m Starkey, or w th whome 
soeu 1 ' standeth in the place of the Agent resident att Bantam of 
the state of the place & of the vsadge that o r Agent and ffacto rs 
haue receiued since they were left theare & of all other Circum- 
staunces that may concerne the saffetie and benefitt of the trade, 
w ch being found to stand in good tearmes then you are to deliu r 
o r ires to o r said Agent & w th his advise to deliu r the king? ma ties 
tres & present to the kinge of that place, & then to land all such 
moneys as are laden in o r 4 seu r all shipps viz iiiGo 11 12 s in 
Royalls of 8 whereof in the red dragon 

9 DRAGON ffiue Chest? Cont: 4000" in Royalls in 

To lande moneys ^ Q bagg? 

HECTOR, ffower Chest? cont: 3200. in Royalls in 

32 baggf . 
ASSENTION, three Chestt Cont: 2400 in Royalls 

in 24 bagge 
SUZAN, twoe Chest? Cont: 1560^ in Royalls in 

15 bagges. 

1 Then ? 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 57 

w ch being done then to take informacon, from the Agent of the 
state of o r busines left in his chardge what quantetie of ladeing he 
hath in aredines for the shipps causing cawsing the dust to be 
sifte from the pepp, yf yt be not doene alredie vpod advise geuen 
I0 [to] that end by o r former ires for w ch purpose 

Garbierssent we sen( j w th y OU garblers w th siues and ffanns to 

thend that o r shipps should not be dischardged w th vnproffitable 
Comodities. 

TO TAKE like informacon what Comodities & how much 

ladinge is pvided att the Molloccos conferringe 

^S^oSdaS w th o' said Agent what shipps of o r ffleete ar 

ffittest to goe for the Molloccos remembring that 

the Hecto 1 ' and Assencon are victualled for 24 monnethes: the 

experience of o r said ffact[o rs ] gayned by their longe aboade att 

Bantam will well informe you how to pceede in the sending of o r 

shippinge to the Molloccos and for the ordering of the m r chandize 

for that place. 

THE pvision for the ladeinge att Bantam being laden abourde 

I2 o r shipps that are first to retourne for England & 

2ft from BiSaS the Comaunders thereof shipped in the said shipps 

f to r g fefo a th d e M h onoc s - and those shipps p'pared readie w ch by you & the 

cos & to what end. Agentf sha n fa resolved vpon to goe for the 

Molloccos o 1 ' direccon is that you m r Henrie Middleton to goe 
yo r selfe in one of the said shipps to the molloccos takeing w th you 
such of o r ffacto rs to leaue to reside in the Molloccos & such stocke 
for their maynetaynaunce, as you shall vpon Conference together 
att Bantam agree vpon to remayne in their handf for the mayn- 
tenance of them & the residue w ch are alredie Resident att Bantam 
by their aboade theare, in w ch space they may both learne the 
languadge of the Countrie, and dispatch such busines as they 
shall be by you appointed vnto : And we wish you to take w th you 
to Banda one or both of the garblers w th their instrm'f and 
provisions to Clense the Cloues from dust and stalkes & the 
Nutmeggf from Rumps and dust that o r shipps be not pestered 
w th the dust or garble of theis kindf of Comodities. 

AND for that the voyag of this Condicon & greate chardge 
cannot admitt any priuate trade, o r will is that 

noe particular trade . . , r . .. * 

& C: penai losse of neither yo r selfe nor any others vpon any pticuler 

1 Pcena. 



58 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



or otner Accompt then the gen r all and ioynct 

stocke doe lade or be pmitted to lade any of theis 
Comodities in o r shipps viz : pepp Clones mace Nut mugf China 
silke Indigo, Amber greece, muske, sivitt, Bezar stones Camphire, 
Beniamyn Burrace 1 or Synamon, but that what quantitie soeu r of 
theis Comodities may be had or brought vpp shall be laden for 
the ioynt accompte of the Company vpon payne of the losse of 
eu r y such Comoditie soe laden, & not laden vpon the ioynct 
Accompte. But yf vpon lycence demaunded of you the said 
Generall & you o r said principall marchauntf any m r , marriner or 
others shall be desirous to lade some small pporcon or quantitie 
of China dishes or light toffies not exceedinge the value of Three 
poundf , or not beareing aboue the bulcke of a small chest Then 
we doe order that all such goodf soe laden by yo r privitie & 
lycence shall be entred into the Pursars Booke of such shipp 
wherein the same is laden to thend that yf any of them doe die by 
the waye their freindf may enioye that w dl is theirs according to 
their wills. 

AND for the better remembraunce & instruccon of you the 

said Gen r all & of you the principall m r chauntf 
t w h h etst g ?nd?e s s le s f fnce what g ood ? were left behinde at Bantam, in 
monts&debter&a the Comeing away of S r lames Lancaster out 

of the Indies & what hath beene puided since by 
the Agent there as by their advice sent vs since the comeing 
home of o r shipps maye appeare. You shall vnderstand That 
S r lames Lancaster left att Banta aboue 1500 baggf of pepp & 
by their tres sent from Bantam by the dutch shipps the agent 
wrote that he had puided 1500 baggf more. And after S r lames 
gaue Comission to the Agent at his depture from Bantam that 
yf the dutchmen were disposed to buie any of the Companies 
pepp & and would giue good pffitt for yt that then the Agent 
should sell yt & pvide more for the Companie att better opor- 
tunitie & better rate vpon w ch Comission soe left you maye 
inquire what hath beene done for the benefitt of the Companie. 

1 Borax; in Italian, borrace, Low Latin, boracum, and Arabic, bumq; all these forma 
being derived from the Persian burah. Borax, or "green earth," is the biborate of 
soda, imported, in its crude form, into India from Thibet under the name of tincal. 
Compare Balax, and Ballace, the Balas or spinel ruby, the al Badakhsh, and Badahhshi 
of the Arabs, imported into India from Badakhshan. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 59 

ITT doth alsoe appeare by the abbreuiate of the accompt 
sent home out of the Indies that there remayned in the handf 
of the Agent m r Starkey 482 ffardells of Callicoes viz 8 
Canisters of Pinthadoes 1 & 117 ffardells of Checkered stuffes 51 
ffardells of long malow girdles 2 59 ffs of girdles for Sysan? no 
ffs of lava girdles, 4 13 Chestf of fine Pinthadoes 6 Chestf of 
diuers sortf of Comodities, 42 ffs of Browne Callicoes & in 
loose Pinthadoes, & in loose Pinthadoes by estimate made by 
S r lames Lancaster aboute 80 iff att the least of all sortf soe 

1 " Pintadoes " were painted cotton clothes, that is chintzes [Sanskrit, chitra, 
"spotted," "variegated," as in chitraka, the " Cheeta " or "hunting-leopard," Felis 
jubata; and chital, the " spotted-deer," Axis maculatus] so called from the Portuguese 
pinta, "painted," literally "spotted," as in pintado, the "Guinea-fowl," and, indeed, 
any " spotted" bird ; thus Fryer, in his Travels [1698], p. 12, writes : " Gaining upon 
" the East with a slow pace, we met those feathered harbingers of the Cape, as 
" Pintado-Birds, Mangosaluedos, Albetrosses." 

2 Malay girdles ? Or may they possibly be girdles of "jute," the fibre of Corchorus 
olitorius, "Jew's Mallow" [maluach of Job xxx. 4] and C. capsularis ? The /ioXdx"'" 
[as if IfiaTia] of Arrian's Periplus of the Red Sea, usually translated [see Vincent's 
Commerce and Navigation of the Ancients (1807), vol. II, p. 116] : " Cotton cloths of the 
" colour of Mallow flowers," were possibly these very same " malow girdles " or jute 
cloth-pieces. If this is a true identification, it is a most interesting one. But I have 
never before met with the phrase " malow-girdles ; " and Arrian is the only classical 
writer who uses the word p,o\6xiva. Plautus, in the Aululana (III, 10), mentions 
" dyers in mallow colour," molochinarii. 

3 Siam ; or possibly Syrian, a port of Pegu, sixty miles east of " China Bukheer," 
one of the delta mouths of the Irawadi. 

4 " Java girdles " are the chintzes called by the Javanese batik, i.e. " painted," or 
rather " delineated "; as the cotton cloth to be decorated, after first being covered 
with a film of wax, poured on at the boiling point, has the design literally delineated 
throughout it with a sharp-pointed style, before being dipped into the dye, which 
colours the cloth only where the wax has been removed by the style. Then, when 
the dye has been fixed, the remaining wax is melted off. Sometimes this process 
is repeated over and over again, with a different dye each time, thus producing 
wonderfully elaborate designs; but the most pleasing results are always obtained 
from a single application of it, as, for instance, in the spriggled batiks, with their 
simple floral patterns pencilled in monochrome on the natural cream-coloured surface 
of the cotton cloth. These so-called "Java girdles," including dress-pieces of all 
sorts, such as robes, mantles, veils, and also curtains, have been celebrated in India 
from the time of the first introduction of Hindu civilization into the Indian Archi- 
pelago ; and in the play of M&late and Madhava [See Wilson's Theatre of the Hindus 
(1871), vol. II. p. 74], attributed to the 8th century, A.D., are expressly referred to 
under the phrase chitra-Javanika, "Javanese chintz"; in this place the painted 
curtain, or peplos, suspended before the adytum of the temple into which, in the 
third act . Makaranda retires to make up his toilet as a female. 



60 FIRST LETTER BOOK OP 

that there might be in all packe & canister aboute 482 fff as 
aforesaid & in loose Callicoes so[m]e 30 fff soe as there appereth in 
the whole to be 512 iff since the denture of our shipps we vnder- 
stand by their tres of the 15 th of ffebruarie 1602 they had shipped 
[52 fff;] for Banda in the Molloccos abourd o r Pinnace 1 w ch we 
trust arriued there in saffetie w th in shorte tyme after her depture 
from Bantam, vpon the pceede of w dl 52 iff yt is hoped by vs 
that there maie be sufficient w th a lardge ou r plus to lade the 2 
shipps we here appointed to the Molloccos w th mace, Cloues, & 
Nutmugf soe that there remayned after the depture of the Pin- 
nace from Bantam 45 2 2 iff or thereaboutf Conteyneing the best 
& richest Comodities of the whole Complem te of the prize the 
other 52 fff sent to the molloccos being of the meanest & basest 
kindf of the said prize goodf w ch greate remaynder of goodf 
att Bantam of the best & greatest value cannot but vpon the 
pceede thereof [make] readie before yo r arrivall att Bantam 
great quantities of Comodities to be retourned from thence. 

BESIDES all w ch seu r all quantities of goods before men- 
cioned there remayned in the handf of m r Starkey & the rest 
at the depture of the shipps homewardf 4907 Royalls of Eight 
& in debtf 3941. pecf of 8 being Compassed in the same 77 
baggf of pepp w ch pepp was rec d into their Custodie soe as yf 
all the goodf & money left w th them & that w ch might & hath 
pceeded thereof doe rest in saffetie you shall not onelie haue 
sufficient to lade yo r fower shipps w th pepp mace Cloues & Nut- 
mugf but as many more shipps of the like burthen besidf the 
moneys w cL you carrie alonge w th you in the shipps amounteing 
to inGof 11 12 s in Royalls as aforesaid, w ch 

The ui6o|i 123 to ' 

be ympioyed not in moneys because yo 11 knowe that spices are heere 

spices but in other * J 

commodities mor o f noe value we wish you to ymploy in some 
other Comodities that may be of more estimacon 
& yeald a better pffitt as rawe silke well Chosed & bought at 
resonable prices or such like Comodities wherew th theis partf of 
Christendome haue not beene gluted as w th spices. 

AND touching the said iii6of u in Royalls now sent in theis 
ships forsomuch as yt is a new supplie of stocke 

The iu6ofH I3" not J . 

sent out vpon a new Aduenture, we will not haue 
1 See page 33. 462. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 61 

wtn the former Ad. the same to be mixed in accompt w th the former 

venture & cause 

whie. adventure but doe requier you to keepe the 

accompt of the ymploym 1 hereof alone by yt selfe. And to the 
end that the same may be distinguished from the former 
accomptf of the first Adventure we doe pray and requier you 
the said Gen r all and principall nVchauntf by Conference and 
assistaunce of the ffacto 1 ' 8 resident both att Bantam & Banda to 
make a valuacon as neare as you cann of all the remaynder of 
the first stocke, what it may be worth to be sold, for that many 
of the Adventurers who are vnwilling to hange & Contynue 
longe in accomptf vnpfect & vndetermined ar desirous to sell 
their remaynders of their stockf to such as will Continue the 
trade, and therefore a valuacon is to be conceiued & sent w th 
the retourne of theis shipps att any hand being a matter not 
onelie desiered by the gen r alitie but expreslie agreed vpon & 
Chardged vpon vs that haue the ordering of the busines to see 
yt pformed, w ch chardge being not in vs to pforme we laye vpon 
you in whose power the pformaunce thereof lieth as you will 
aunsweare the neglect thereof. 

BESIDES the former pticulers of prize goode & moneys 

before mencioned there appeth further to rest in 
hS Sde S s tar the the hande of m r Starkey and the other ffacto ra 
fefTSt ian d tam. &c: *o peeces of Clothes of diuers coullo 1 ' 3 Cont: 514 

english yardf a- bason & Ewer of siluer poiz 
102 oz, twoe standing Cupps poiz 63 oz whereof they are to 
giue you an accompt att yo r being att Bantam. 

IFF those pt of the Indies doe yeald any good quantitie of 

Ibony ffarnando bucke 1 or such like heavie wood 
W o h u a ided d is to be f va -l ue > y u mav pvide soe much thereof as will 

ballast yo r shipps soe that the same take vpp 

1 Probably, as suggested by Mr. Bolton Corney, in his Voyage of Sir Henry 
Middkton (Hakluyt Society), Pernambuco-wood (called also Nicaragua-wood, Jamaica- 
wood, and peach- wood), an inferior kind of sappan, or brazil. Sappan is the wood of 
Casalpinia Sappan, a native of Southern India, its Tamil name being shappu, and its 
Malayalam name shappannam, both meaning " red." From the latter was formed its 
Malayan name sapang, and its Arabic name bakkam ; while, translated into the ter- 
minology of the mediaeval commerce of Europe, shappannam became "brazil," that 
is " blazing "-red-wood. Afterwards, a variety (Ccssalpinia echinata) of this brazil 
having been found in South America, its name was given to the vast country of the 
Brazils. 



62 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

noe roome of stowinge that maye otherwyse be more pfitablye 
ymployed. 

AND forasmuch as we are not ygnoraunt that the mallice of 

the Portingalls toward f o r discou'y of the trade 
i^K en iaiifcf r & to those ptes will not lett him abstayne from all 
tot* t eM t oiioccos rled practices of annoyaunce w ch lieth in his power to 

offer and pforme to the trade of the Mollocos, 
who happilie 1 maye by some layinge of waight for the intercepting 
of o r Penace sent to Banda depri[ue] vs of the pvisions w ch 
otherwyse that voyadge might supply vs w th all yf any such or 
other p r venting accident hath happened : yet would we haue you 
to carrie in yo r twoe shipps appointed for the Molloccos such 
quantitie of Pinthadoes moneys & other pvisions as may suffice 
to lade the said twoe shipps. 

THUS we haue touched many pticulers of o r busines not 

w th standinge many other things may occur w ch 

leaueing other thinges .. , , 

of the state of y e may greathe concerne vs, w ch we must leaue to 

busines to Consider- ' . ^ 11,1 

aeon and the states & yo 1 good Consideracons to deale therein as time 

healthes of men &c : , , rr ~ ,. 

and occasion shall offer you occasion Comendinge 
vnto your care the state of such as shall fall sicke in the voyadge 
either outward or inward that they may be Comforted : And yf 
the die see that their goodf may be kept in saffetie, and their 
wills & dispotition thereof soe well testified that there growe 
not theke 2 suspition of the truth of some of their wills as 
hath beene had of the wills of others that dyed in the last 
voyadge. 

AND forasmuch as the daies ol mans lyfe are lymitted & the 
c r taine lymitacon thereof onelie knowne vnto god, we doe heere 
by ordeyne & puide, that whereas we haue appointed & placed 
you the said Henrie Middleton in the Redd Dragon as Gen r all 
or gou r no r of the wholle ffleete & you m 1 xptofer Colthurst as 
leiuetenant gen'all and principall m r chaunt in the Hecto 1 ' & you 
m r Roger Style o r principall m r chaunte in the Assencon, & you 
m r Wiftm Keeleinge another of o r principall m r chauntf in the 
Anie dicing others to Suzan i yf therfore yt shall happen any of you to 
were pl firs e t d appointed decease in this voyadge we doe ordeyne that 
&c s : oe ' he that in place & order by vs appointed to 

1 Haply. 2 The like. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 63 

goe as principall in eu r y shipp w ch shall surviue the ptie 
deceased shall & may by the appointem 1 of the Generall, shall 1 
him selfe in the shipp out of w ch the said ptie did decease, and 
hold his place in the same shipp and the place that the ptie 
deceased held gen r allie in the voyadge and soe a succession 
to be held from the generall to the Leiuetenaunte from the 
leiuetenaunte to the principall m r chaunt placed in the Assencon 
from the principall m r chant of the Assencon to the principall 
m r chant placed in the Suzan : And yf yt shall happen all the 
principalls of the seu r all shipps to decease (as god forbid [)] the 
like succession to holde & be kept by the seu r all m r chauntf 
appointed to hold the second places in eu r y the said shipps & soe 
in succession from one to another according as the seu r all 
m r chauntf hold place in eu r y shipp. 

PROUIDED alwayes that yf m r Wittm Starkey o r Agent 
resident att Bantam doe come home in the 

wheare mr Starkey - . . . . , 

shaii be shipped yf retourne of the shipps then we doe requier you 

he retourne home. n 11 ,. i ,, i , 11 

o 1 generall & principall nVchauntf to take espetiall 
order that he be pvided for & placed in such shipp as he shall be 
shipped as a man that we hould to be had in good reguarde, & 
to be respected accordinglie and yf any of the principall m r chauntf 
places fall voied by the death of any of them, or otherwyse, that 
then he supplie that place in his retourne homewardes. 

AND lastelie whereas his ma tie vnder his great seale of 
England hath appointed you the saied m r Henrie 
Middleton the generall and principall Gou r no r of 
all his subject^ ymployed in the voyadge & you 
w o h 0n ?he C mTn the saied m r xptofer Colthurst to be leiuetenaunt 
iu e as in the gen'all, And yf you the said xptofer Colthurst 
surviue the said Henrie Middleton then to succeed 
him in the place of Gou r no r or Generall w th out appointing any 
further succession by like warrant to any that is ymployed in the 
said voyadge and that yt lyeth not in vs to giue to any of the 
residue of o r principall m r chaunte any warrant for the Correccon 
of Offences by penall lawes to be executed vpon the bodies of 
any his ma ties subiectf , we doe in that behalfe as to men haueing 

1 Apparently written in error for " ship," 



64 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

reason and discrecon & to men that feare god offer vnto yo r 
Considerations the benefitt of order & peaceable gou r nm te in 
matters & enterprises vndertaken for a Comon good, reposeing 
in you o r seuerall nV'chauntf & all you o r sev r all Officers appointed 
& intertayned in this voyadge a spetiall hope trust and Confidence 
that you will accorde and agree together and ioyne in freindshipp 
& amytie to doe & execute yo r vttermost endevo rs for the benefitt 
of the voyadge w th out Contencon discord or emulacon to be vsed 
amongst you guideing yo r selues therein by that gen r all Regim* & 
sea gou r nm te w ch o r English ffleetf doe vse when they sorte them 
selues together, haueing espetiall & due respect to him that is 
the principall or cape m r chante & soe we Comend yo u and yo r 
endeuo 1 * 8 to good^ 1 puidence who guide you w th his feare and 
defend you from all daungers Amen. 

AS touching such ffacto 1 ' 3 as are to be left in the Countrie or of 

those w ch goe now in theis shipps we doe agree 

and giue order by this o r Commission that the 

appointm* of the said ffacto 1 ' 8 to reside in those places shall be att 

the direccons .and Consent of you o 1 ' Generall, m r xptofer 

Colthurst, m r Starkey and m r Morgan or any three of you, 

wherein we hope you will haue that Consideracon as to make 

choyse of the fittest : neither lett the placeing of o v 

vnto whome the J 

p d e n LSb e f h?& ff act rs m the seu r all shipps as, they are alredie 
o^piaceingtobenoe pl ace d be any rule to you, or any ground for them 

to enioye those places of ymploym* wherein you 
are to bestowe them, otherwyse then they shall be found able & 
meete to deserue that trust of ymploym te . 

THE shipps being readie to depte & all o r Comissions & 

instruccons being resolued vpon and finished : wee 

what we were ad- / ,-* 

vised of out of the receiued ires out of the lowe Countries w ch came 

lowe Countries from 

Bantam since aii from o r ffacto 1 ' 8 from the East Indies by the dutch 

thinges were in a J 

shipps viz from m r Wiftm Starkey of the 22 th of 
lune and 2 other tres one from Edmond Scott and the other from 
Thomas Tudd both dated the 17 th of August 1603. by w ch latter 
tres we were aduised of the death of m r Starkey and m r Morgan & 
of others who were left att Bantam and alsoe of the damadge that 

1 God's. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 65 

happened vnto vs in o r goodf burnt by fyer in the dutch warehowse 
together w th the disappointem* of o r intended voyadge to the 
Molloccos by the Contrarietie of wynd^ 1 . 1 All w ch thingf being 
Considered we take them as they were indeede the hand of god, 
who disposeth of all enterprizes according to his good will & 
pleasure, w ch Accident^ howsoeu r by the death of o r said principall 
ffacto rs they doe in some manner moue vs to alter o r said Comis- 
sions & advises soe farr as we had appointed any thinge to be 
done by the advise of the said m r Starkey & m r Morgan, yet in 
substance we purpose to hold o r former resolucons for the follow- 
ing of o r busines And in steede of the .psons deceased we wysh 
you to advise & vse Conference w th the ffacto rs remayneing, whome 
you finde most apt & able to assist you in the direction of the 
busines and touching yo r pceedingf in the voyadge from Bantam 
to the Molloccos after order for lading of the Dragon and the 
Suzan w th pepp to retourne for England being taken we thinke y* 
fitt you Capt : Middleton p r pare yo r selfe w th all speede to goe for 
Banda and doe furnish yo r selfe w th the most aptest & ffitest of o r 
ffacto rs to attend you, and to be left att Banda, for the furder 
followinge of that trade according as yt may be found likelie to 
bring benefitt to the Companie wherein you are accordinge to yo r 
good discrecon & Consideracon to vse the more or fewer ffacto ra to 
be left there as you shall finde the more or lesse hope of benefitt to 
be made by their residence in that place not forgetting the Com- 
panyes desire as neere as you cann possiblie to cleare the former 
voyadge according to o r former direccon, by a discreete & reson- 
able valuacon of the remayner. And for the accomplishing of 
ladeing att Banda in the Moloccos you o r said gen r all are to take 
w th vo u soe muc h O f the Comodities remayneing in o r ffacto 1 ' 8 
handf att Bantam as they thinke will serue for the puiding of yo r 
ladinge att the Molloccos according to the pportion geuen by 
S r lames Lancaster to puide, remembring that they dutchmen 
bought of Spillesbe 3 the like Comodities to carrie to the molloccos 

1 See Edmond Scott's relation of events at Bantam between February, 1603, and 
1605, printed in Purchas, Lib. III., ch. 4. 

2 Speilberg or Spilberg, the captain of a Dutch ship, who had joined Lancaster 
at his departure from Acheen on an agreement that he should have a share in any 
prize that might be taken. He afterwards sold at Bantam the goods thus obtained, 
and it is to this the entry refers, 

F 



66 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

for the better furnishing of their lading : but for yo r better assur- 
aunce least the saide Comodities should not be in request there, 
you shall doe well to take w th you 10000, 15000, or 20000 Royalls 
of 8 as you shall thinke meete & being soe furnished both by 
wares and money, you may both puide you ladinge and supplie yo r 
ffacto rs w ch you shall thinke ffitt to leaue to recyde theare w th suffi- 
cient stocke for puision of Cloues and Mace agaynst another 
yeare. This piect being lade downe for the trade att Banda you 
shall doe well in yo r going thither to touch att the Hand of 
Amboyna or any other Hand by the way where Cloues may be had 
and to furnish yo r selfe w th what quantitie you cann gett whereby 
you may the lesse depend vpon yo r puision of Cloues att Banda, 
& haueing directed and ordered yo r busines for the Moloccos, 
then vpon yo r retourne to Bantam to take full and pfect knowledge 
of the wholle state of o r busines & to leaue 10 or 12 ffacto rs there 
w th such stocke as shall remayne vnymployed or as may be spared 
o r shipps being laden admonishing the ffacto rs to be more carefull 
to buye their pepp att the best advantage then they haue beene, & 
to buie of the largest pepp w ch heare beareth the best estimacon, 
and vnlesse you shall finde yt verie necessarie that some ffacto" 
be left att Banda, we are of opinion & doe like well that the 
residue of o r ffacto rs be holden altogether att Bantam but herein 
we leaue you to yo r owne experience, as yo u shall finde the Course 
most convenient And soe as before Comend you to godf puidence 
AND whereas o r ffacto 1 ' 3 deceased doe appeare to haue left 
some estate behinde them w ch must haue meanes to come to the 
handf of such as haue interest therein we doe wysh you to take 
order : that all things that doe appeare to belonge vnto them be 
duelie and trulie inventoried & shipped aparte by them selues, and 
their wills saffelie kepte and brought home together w th their 
bookf & notf of their buieing and sellingf whereby there estates 
were encreased & gotten, to thend that the Company may be satis- 
fied that they haue beene well delt w th all therein & their ffreindf 
receaue that w ch shall rightfullie ap^teine vnto them. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 67 

[HIS 1 writeing of the kinge of Tydore to the kinge ma tie 
of England is to lett yo r highnes vnderstand that the 
kinge of Holland hath sent hither into theis partes, a 
ffleete of shipps to ioyne w th o 1 ' auncient enymie the 
kinge of Turnato & the ioyntelie together haue ouer runn and 
from the kinge of spoyled parte of o r Countrie & are determined to 
? y ed Sptaine iS HTnHe distroy both vs and o r subiectf. Now vnder- 
t^hfsScin^Mayt standing by the bearer hereof Capt: Henrie 
Middleton that yo r highnes is in freindshipp, w th 
the kinge of Spaine we desire yo r ma tie that you would take pittie 
of vs that we may not be distroyed by the kinge of Holland, and 
Turnato to whome we haue offered noe wronge But they by 
forceable meanes seeke to bereaue vs of o r kingdome, and all greate 
kingf vpon the Earth are ordeyned by God to sucker all them 
that be wrongfullie oppressed soe I appeale vnto yo r ma tie for 
sucker agaynst my enimyes not doubting but to finde releefe att 
yo r ma ts hand^. And yf yo r ma tie send hither I humblie intreate 
that yt may be Capt: Henrie Middleton or his brother w th whome 
I am well acquainted : Thus we end praying God to enlardge 
yo r kingdomes & bless yo u & all yo r Councells. Tydore. 




LRE 1 geven from yo r freinde the kinge of Bantam sent 
vrito the kinge of England of Scotland ffraunce & 
Ireland desiering god to p r serue yo r health & to exalt 
yo u more & more & all yo v Councells. And whereas 
yo r ma tie hath sent Generall Henrie Middleton he came vnto me 
from the kinge of m health. I did hcare that yo r ma tie was come to 
the Crowne of England w ch doth greatlie reioyce 
my harte now England and Bantam are both as 
one. I haue alsoe receaued a present from yo r 
ma tie . The w cb I giue you many thankf for yo r 
kindnes. I doe send yo r ma tie 2 Bezar stones the one waying 14 
masses 2 & the other 3. And soe god haue you in his keepeing. 

1 Printed in Punhas, Lib. V., ch. 14. 

? " The weight by which they [the Achinese] sell Precious Stones is called Masse. 

F I 




68 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

[HE 1 kinge of Mollocco to the kinge ma tic of England 
Scotland ffraunce and Ireland sendeth greeting 
heareing the good reporte of yo r ma tic & of the greatnes 
of yo r kingdomes by the greate Captaine ffrancis 
Drake in the tyme of my ffather w ch was aboute 30 yeares past 2 by 
the w ch Capt : my ffather did send a Ringe vnto 

ftrom the kinge of ,1 /~\ f r+ i * /*- 

Tumato to his matie the (j ueene oi England as a token of Remem- 

sent by Henrie , , r . - .-IT-.. 

Middieton or genraii brance w ch yf the foresaid Drake were hueing he 

directed to or kinges . 

matie w th a prsent & could Certifie yo r ma tie of the greate loue and 

deliuredin May 1606. - . . . . 

fremdshipp on either side he in the behalfe of the 
Queene my ffather for him & his successo 1 " 8 w ch tyme after the 
denture of the said Capt we haue dalie expected his retourne, 
my father liueing many yeares after. And I after the death of 
my ffather liued in the same hope till I was ffather to n 
Children, since w ch tyme we haue beene informed that English 
men were men of bad dispotition, & came not as peaceable 
nV'chauntf but as theeues . and robbers and to depose vs of o r 
Countries, w ch by the comeing of the bearer hereof yo r ma ties 
servant Capt: Henrie Middieton we haue found to the Contrary 
whereof we greatelie reioyce. And after many yeares of expec- 
tacon of some English fforces by the pmyse of Capt : Drake 
heere arriued certeine shipps w ch we well hoped had beene 
English men, but they pued to be Hollenders, & then being 
out of all hope of sucker of the english nation we were 
enforced to wryte to the Prince of Holland to craue aide and 
succo r of him agaynst o r auncient enymies the Portingalles. And 
according to o r request he hath sent hither his forces w ch hath 
expelled all the Portingalls out of the ffortf they here hould att 
Ambweno 3 and Tydore, And whereas yo r ma tie hath sent vnto vs 
a most kinde Ire by Capt Henrie Middieton yt doth not a little 
reioyce vs : as alsoe the said Capt Henr Middieton was desierous 

" 10} whereof make an ounce." John Davis his Relation in Purchas, Lib. III., ch. i. 
The masha is the elementary weight, of from 16 to 20 grains, used immemorially by 
the Hindu jewellers throughout India. The names of most of the weights of the 
Malays and Javanese are taken from the ancient Hindu ones, as rakat, so named after 
the Hindu rati, and tail after the Hindu tola (cf. rdXavrov, tolero, tollo, Tantalus, Atlas). 

1 This copy differs to some extent from the version given in Purchas, Lib. V., ch. 14. 

2 See Purchas, Lib. II., ch. 5. 3 Amboyna. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 69 

to leaue a ffactory here we were very willinge there vnto, and gaue 
o r Consent, w ch the Admirall of the Hollenders vnderstandinge 
he came and Challenged a former pmyse w ch we had wrytte to the 
Prince of Holland that yf he would send vs such Succo r as should 
expell the Portugalls out of theis ptf that noe other Nation should 
haue trade heare but onelie they, soe that we were enforced 
agaynst o r likeing to yeald vnto the Hollenders Capt request for 
this p r sent tyme. Wherefore we craue pardon of yo r ma tie . And 
whereas the Hollenders Admirall doth soliscite vs not to hold any 
ffreindshipp w th the englishe nor to giue eare nor Creditt to yo r 
ma^ ires : yett neu r theless for all their sute yf yt please you to 
send hither agayne they shall be most freindlie wellcome, & in 
token of ffreindshipp w ch we desire w th yo r ma tie . Wee haue sent 
you a small remembraunce of a Bahare of Cloues o r Countrie 
being poore & yealding noe other Comoditie w ch we pray yo u to 
accept in good parte. And soe we leaue you to god who bless 
you and all yo r Councells. Tarnata. 

Theis 3 foresaid Ires were translated out of the India speech 
into English. 




MOSTE l mightie kinge of Dachem and Sumatra to all 
psons that shall read this present writeinge, Greeting. 
IN TOKEN of o r espetiall freindshipp & vpon 
many good Consideracons vs moueing, and cheeflie 
vppon the Contemplasing of the gratious ires receiued from the 
most famous Queene of England : we of o r 
espetiall meere motion doe signifie and declare to 
Ulra1 all people, that we haue intertayned into o r freind- 



1 There is another copy of this grant in the India Office Records (0. C. No. i), 
but it presents no important variation. The fate of the original is not known. There 
is an entry in the Court Minutes for 26th February, 1614, that Sir James Lancaster, 
who was supposed to have it in his custody, was to be asked for it, to send to the 
Indies (Cal. E. I. State Papers, 1513-1616, p. 279); but there is no further mention of 
the subject. 



70 FIRST LETTER BOOK OP 

shipp, & holie league o r well beloued the SERINISSlMA 
REGINA DE ENGLA TERRA, to hold and keepe true and 
faithfull league w th her accordinge to the Comendable Course & 
law of all nations, vnto whose subiectf , we wish much felicitie and 
therefore doe giue and graunte by theis p r sentf for vs o r heires & 
successo 1 ^ as much as in vs lieth to the said subiectf of the most 
noble Queene of England o r Confederate & eu r y of them theis 
articles, graunte & priuiledgf heereafter expressed and declared. 

FFIRSTE we doe giue and graunte ffree licence aucthoritie 
& power to all the people, ffacto rs , m r chauntf or subiectf of the 
Queene of England that they may att all tymes heereafter for eu r 
suerlie and saffelie come into any portes or els wheare into theis 
o r dominiones & kingdome of Sumatra w th their shipps goodf & 
m r chandize w th out any deteinm* 6 or hindraunce to them, or to 
their goodf : & theare to abide soiourne, buie & sell, barter and 
exchaunge according to their owne 1 manner and fashion w th all 
manner of Nations whatsoeu 1 ' as well as w th o r owne naturall 
subiectf : both in spices & all other m r chandizes & soe they may 
tarrie in o r Countrie soe long as they will, & goe away when the 
list, w th out any ympedim* lett or hindraunce, paying all such 
debtf as they shall owe to any of o r subiectf w th in o r said 
dominion. 

FFURTHERMORE o r will & pleasure is that all such goodf 
and m r chandize as any of the subiectf of the Queene of England 
shall bringe into this o r kingdome or any the partes thereof shall 
be ffree of all Custome or paym* whatsoeu 1 as well for that w dl 
shall be brought into theis o r dominions as for all manner of 
m r chandize they shall transporte out of the same for any forreine 
pte whatsoeu r . 

ITEM yf any of their shipps in tempest of weather shall be in 
daunger to be lost, & ^ishe, & therevpon shall stande in neede of 
o r helpe wee will and Comaund that o r vessells w th all speede 
doe helpe & succo 1 ' them, to saue the same shipps & goodf and 
what may be saued, to retourne to the said m r chauntf or their 
assignes they paying resonable Consideracon for their travell. 

ITEM yf any Englishe man shall make his will & Testam te to 

1 "Nowe" inO. C. i. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. fjt 

whomesoeu r (by the same will [ )] he shall giue his goodf, the ptie 
shall haue them accordinglie, and yf he die intestate, he to whome 
the cheefe ffacto r or gou r no r shall saie the goodf of the dead to 
belonge, he shall posses the same. 

ITEM that eu r y figaine made by the said m r chaunt w th any 
manner of pson for any kinde of m r chandize shall be firme and 
staple & that noe man of either ptie may shrinke or goe backe 
from the same & yt shall be lawfull for them to goe before any of 
o r lustices & to register the same in a Booke according to the 
teno r thereof, yf any Controu r sie shall aryse present iustice to be 
done to both .pties, & when they haue sold any of their wares to 
o r subject^ or any other they shall not retourne the said wares 
vpon the m r chauntf handf, but paie for them or ells they shall 
haue present iustice 

ITEM yf any English m r chaunte ffacto r or servant shall offend 
the Agent or cheefe Gou r no r of the ffactorie yt shall be lawfull for 
the said Gouerno r to doe iustice vpon the said tie, or to send 
him home into England att his pleasuer, & further we graunte 
vnto the said Gou r no r power and aucthoritie to end any Con- 
trou r sie that shall aryse betweene them & to doe iustice accordinge 
to their owne lawes and Customes. 

ITEM we doe graunte the said marchauntf 3 and to their Suc- 
cesso 1 ' 8 , that yf any of them or of their servantf shall be wounded 
or be slaine in any te or place of o r dominion, then informacon 
thereof being geven we o r iustices and other Officers will execute 
due correccon & punishm* w th out delaie accordinge to the cause 
of the offence, soe that yt shall be an example to all others not to 
offend in the like. And yf it shall happen the ffactors servaunt^ 
or mynisters of the said nVchauntf to trespasse or offend, whereby 
they or any of them shall incurr the daunger of death, or of 
punishm 4 , that then the goodf wares or m r chandizes of their 
Senio rs shall not therefore be forfected Confiscate seazed vpon nor 
spoyled by vs o r heires or Successo 1 ' 3 or by any of o r Officers 
ministers or subiectf but shall remaine franke & free as dis- 
chardged of all punishm* & losse. 

ITEM we doe pmyse the foresaid m r chauntf graunting yt for 
eu r for vs & o r heires that yf any shall bringe any manner of goodf 
or m r chandize meete for Treasurie that we will not cause anie 



72 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

stale or arrest to be made of their said goodf or m r chaundize to 
vs or for o r vses w th out present Content to be made by o r Threr at 
such reasonable prises as the m r chaunt could sell them for ready 
money, & that noe price or valuacon shalbe set vpon their good? or 
m r chandizes by vs or any Officers of o rs . 

ITEM we of o r goodnes haue graunted to the said English 
m r chaunt their successo servauntf & deputies that doe or shall 
remayne in any pte of this o r kingdome of Sumatra whether yt be 
in Dachem or any other pte of o r dominion freelie to keepe their 
owne lawe & in any wyse none of o re to force them to o r lawe or 
faith against their wills. 

ITEM yf any man shall saie, that theis being Christians haue 
spoken any thinge to the derogacon of o r holie faith & religion & 
haue slaundered the same, in this matter as well as in all others 
there shall noe false witnes in any case be admitted. 

LAST of all to thintent that this league w th her ma tie & the 
aforesaid grauntf & priuiledgf w th her subiectf , may the better be 
obserued and inuiolablie be pformed, we by the grace of God 
greate kinge of Dachem & Sumatra for vs o r heires & sucssessors 
doe pmyse by o r princelie word in stead of an Oath inviolablie to 
maintaine & preserue & will cause to be inuiolablie kept p r served 
& mayntayned frome tyme to tyme & att all tymes heereafter & 
for the more ratificacon we comaund all o r Captaines ludges Cus- 
tomers Gou r no rs & servauntf wheresoeu r theis ires or priuiledgf 
shall be scene throughout all o r dominions that they be obeyed in 
all pointf accordinglie as longe as the Queene of England .of her 
pte shall duelie keepe and obserue this league & holie peace 
expressed in this priuiledge w th vs and o r subiectf we alsoe of o r 
Royall pte doe chardge & Comaund the same soe longe to be 
strayghtlie kept & obserued. And the Contrarie to this diuyne 
league and priuiledge, lett noe man presume to doe or saie any 
thinge. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. ft 

DISCRIPCON 1 of the Hand of Banda w th the Townes and 
Hand? thereof: w th the wares or marchandizes therein spent 
& vttered & wares to be bought theare as followeth. 
i 

|O witt Lunter 2 Nere 3 in w ch towne we bought o r Nut- 
megges & maces, and theare sould diuers sortes of o r 
Stuff? Pinthados lava girdles in barter for maces & 
nutt? 4 Madgawgen, Lykou, Artatten, 5 Semar, Kamber 5 
Rere, Anwen, Dunno 1 ', Dedyer, Rossengen, 6 Laba taker 5 Latter, 
Loekra Regacke Rata muferr Polayu, 7 Palroyen. 8 

Wares and m r chandizes spent & vttered there namelie stuff? 

or Clothes as our men call them : & called by 

the Dutchmen kleetghees 9 being the same & such 

like stuff? as S r lames Lancaster tooke w ch are made att 

Bengalla Mesepatamya 10 Cheremandalle & St Thome, and as 

some saye alsoe att Suratt & Cambaya w ch stuffes as the dutch- 

Townes and places m en saie are thus called viz Dragon, Patta Kassa 

where the are made. Q f the ffinest Torya, Bdffd, TelU Pricken, KdUtkey, 

Mossaffey, Patta Malim Tzijnd, Sorassa Madynceus 11 Brasse peeces 
of Ordinances w th Chambers in the breeches w ch are to be had 
in Bantam but brought from Chyna as thought. All theis 
aboue said wares are well vttered in those Townes. 

Rise and Sagur w ch is at the barke of a Tree, or made of a 

Tree w ch they buie & eate insteed of bread. 
their bread. a6 Nowe followeth English Comodities to be 

1 There is another copy of this note in the 0. C. Series (N. 35). 

2 Lantore, Lontor or Groot Banda. 3 Neira or Banda Neira. 4 Nutmegs. 

5 In a map of Banda given in a Histoire de la Navigation aux Indes Orientates (1609) 
the towns of Ortattan, Combeer and Labetack are shewn, the two former being on the 
island of Lantore, and the third on the island of Neira. 

6 Pulo Rosagijn. 1 Pulo Ai ? 8 Pulo Ron ? 

9 Apparently some variant of the Dutch kleed, a cloth, dress, or habit. 

10 This happens to be an interesting blunder, although due merely to the trans- 
criber's preoccupation with "the blessed word Mesopotamia," for from the earliest 
times there was a close connection between the countries on the Persian Gulf, and 
the Coromandel Coast; and both Nineveh and Masulipatam mean "Fish-town." 
Mosul, which gives its name to muslin, is the modern representative of ancient 
Nineveh, but the word has no connection with masuli in Masuli-patam, and would 
appear to be the Arabic word ntahsul, " revenue," here meaning " Revenue "-station. 

11 Madinrens (0. C. 35). It is impossible to identify all of these local denomina- 
tions of piece goods ; but for some of them see the notes on the two following pages. 



?4 FIRST LETTER BOOK OP 

theare sold Broad sword blades Royalls of 8. English Clothes 

En iish wares Rec ^ S ^ stamelsl ^ Io > I2 or ^ ste the yarde 

veluettf Redd velvettf greene branched w th 
fflowers &c : w ch are not English but China veluett? & to be 
had att Bantam of the Chineses much better cheepe then we 
can carrie English veluettf thither. 

ffor all the foresaid wares & Royalls the people of Banda, 
Spiccs< Turnato, Tedom & other places of the Molloccos 

doe giue in Barter mace Nutmegge & Cloues. 
In the places & Townes abouesaid maces are gathered 3 
Maces gathered 3 tymes in a yeare viz in lulie is the greatest, con- 
tinuing vntill September. Againe in December 
& againe in ffebruarie. The last twoe gathering^ are but 
small in quantitie, the greate gatheringe the call their Payty, 
& the 2 small gathering^, the call Ara and Messon laua. 

A DISCRIPTION of the Hand of Amboyna translated 
out of Dutch i6o5. 2 

|HEARE groweth aboundance of Cloues not eu r y yeare, 
but eu r ry third yeare & eu r y third yeare is a greate 
growth now this present yeare of Anno dm 1605. 
Heare are diuers sortes of East Indy wares uttered 
as folio weth Clothes as o r men vse to call them, & called by 
heare but ^ e dutchmen Kletgees being linnen & made of 
Gotten woll, or the same stuffe, that Callicutt 
cloth? is made, to cast aboute their bodies as Clokes or Mantles, 
or as girdles and Skarffes aboute their loynes : named as followeth 
& for w ch the Amboyneses doe giue vs Cloues in barter. 

Tooria, black Baffattaf Keykam, Sallallo, Pattala, 5 Sarassaf 

1 See page 96, note 2. 

2 There is another copy of this and the following notes in the document already 
referred to (0. C. 35). It is there described as " a Noate written in Duch A 1606 & 
Translated by one of the Companyes facto ra at Bantam." 

3 Calico. 

4 So called from the Persian bafta, "woven": it was originally a kind of calico, 
chiefly obtained from Baroch. 

5 A silk cloth, so called from the Canarese and Malayalam pattuda, " silk cloth." 

6 Perhaps sari, the cloth used as a robe by Hindu women. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 75 

Tzier, Mallya, 1 Patta? Mora, Tanknyla, there 3 are 

white Clothes w th Red stripes on the end blew 

kanteky black Mossaffeyf blew Cheney* Clothes all or the most pte of 

theis abouesaid are made aboute Bengalla, Mesapatamya St Thome 

Cheremandall or Cambaya & some other t of the East Indies. 

1 Malayia (0. C. 35). 

2 This word means " breadth," and signifies a cloth of one breadth. The do-patta, 
or sheet of two breadths, is the only garment of the women of the lower orders in 
Bengal. 

3 Theis (0. C. 35). 

4 That is muza'fari, "saffron-y," originally a "saffron "-dyed stuff. Yellow has 
immemorially been the colour of joy among the Hindus, and in Hindu art Vishnu 
and Rama are always apparelled in bright yellow ; dull yellow (bag-wa, " god "-colour) 
being the colour of the vestments of the Saiva ascetics. Red also is held by the 
Hindus to be a joyous colour, and is always worn at marriages ; and both colours 
are regarded by them as sacred to the sun, and to the East, or place of sun rise, and 
the South, or "right hand path" of the sun; red being the colour usually appro- 
priated to the former and yellow to the latter, although some sects reverse this allo- 
cation. Yellow was the sacred colour also of the Babylonian and Assyrian Anunit or 
Ishtar, and to this day it continues to be the favourite colour of Jewish women. 
Significantly enough the early Christians, in the same way that they made Friday 
the day of Ishtar and Venus and Friya the unlucky day of the week, made yellow 
the colour of sin and crime, painting the doors of felons yellow, and compelling the 
Jews to wear yellow, just as the Mahomedans compel them, and the Christians of 
Egypt and Syria, &c., to wear dark blue, which is the uncanny colour and the colour 
of mourning throughout Anterior and Southern Asia. As of Anunit or Ishtar, 
yellow was the sacred colour of Aphrodite-Venus and Artemis-Diana, both deriva- 
tives from Ishtar; and from the earliest ages it was the colour most affected by 
the women of Greece. In Homer Eos is not only " rosy -fingered " (podoSaKTvXos, 
Odyssey II., i), but "saffron-mantled" (icpoKOTreirXos, Iliad VIII., i, and XIX., i) ; as 
are Enyo one of the three Graiae in Hesiod (Theognis, 273), and the Muses in 
Alcman (74) ; while the references and allusions in the Greek and Latin poets to the 
saffron-coloured robes so fashionable among the ladies of ancient Athens and Rome 
are innumerable, as in the Agamemnon of jEschylus, the Lysistrata, Thesmophoriazusa, 
and Ecdesiazusa of Aristophanes, and the plays of Plautus, who in his Aulularia (III., 
10) mentions not only "dyers in mallow colour" (see p. 59, note 2), but "dyers in 
saffron" incedunt infectores crocotarii their stealthy, enticing approach, like that 
of a Bombay borah, or "box-wallah," indicating the reckless passion of the Roman 
women for this colour, in the belief that it gave an irresistible power to the natural 
charm of their sex over men: in which they were justified, to judge from the sweet, 
winsome loveliness of the young high-caste Hindu women of Western India, as they 
appear abroad on gala occasions issuing forth in their innumerable twinkling slippers 
of Telmont yellow, rosy red, or Mazarine blue, and enrobed in lustrous saffron- 
tinctured saris of soft fluttering silk, rendered still more radiant and ethereal by 
the sparkle and sheen of diamond and pearl. 

5 China (0. C. 35). 



76 FIRST LETTER BOOK! Of 

Now follow the English or Hollandf wares theare vendible 
some head peeces some graven some guilt, long peeces w th smap 
English or Hoiiandes hances, 1 the cocke to stand on the hither side 
the panne longe stocky & straight y c barrell 
square velvettf red, velvettf grene, Damaskes, yet not many 
theis are to be bought in Bantam of the Chyneses & to be 
carried to the Molloccos. 

Painted drinking glasses, lookeinge glasses 3. 4. 5. 6 pipkans 2 
being as I thinke small pewter or woodden kanns made w th 
spowtf to drinke in w ch are made cheeflie in Holland as I thinke 
some kniues I thinke sleight kniues, some w th painted haftes 3 
of wood or boane. 

Royalls of 8 Tenkees 4 w ch I suppose are Ellaphaunts teeth. 

Theis people are deceiptefull in their Cloues men must 
take heede least they putt dust to make them 

deccipt in Cloues. . t t . 

heauie or mingle some such stune amonge them 
w ch you must carefullie finde & spie out in tyme, 

Theis be the names of the Townes in Amboyna Hito, 
Mamelen, Nusitelle & the Castle, but at Amboyna we shall not 
get any Cloues because of the Hollenders. Theis townes lie vpon 
one Hand viz : Lowe Lossiuy, 5 Cambella, Keyebabbit Lackey Latu. 
most store of cioues But att lowc Cambella & Hito falleth most 

cloues. 

And is alsoe the best Roade for shipps & are 

the best roade for j , 

ships: good people. Q. gOOU people. 

1 Snaphances (Dutch snaphaan), i.e. guns with spring locks, as opposed to the old 
match locks. 

2 Pipe Canns (0. C. 35). 3 0. C. 35 adds " some playne haftes." 

4 Tanga (Sanskrit tanka, " a weight " of silver), the chief silver coin of the Mogol 
Emperors of Delhi, representing the dirhem (drachma) of the Arabs, and the " rupee" 
(Sanskrit rupya, " beautified "silver) of modern India. The term is still applied to a 
silver coin in Turkestan, worth about j%d. The padma-tanka of Southern India was a 
gold coin, and in Tamil the word tanka, means, specifically, "weighty," as gold. 
Universally in India a mint is designated tankasala, commonly shortened to tangsal. 

6 Lowlo, Lossidi (0. C. 35). 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 77 

A DISCRIPTION of the Hand Selcbes or 

Selebes. 

Makasser. 

JHEAREin are spent & vttered theis wares followinge 
Clothes as we call them, and by the Hollenders called 
India wares kletgees, Towit dragon, Patta, Mea, Tory a, 
Baffa, knitt Sipann, Threle, 1 Ormesines* or 
Taffeties Read velvet braunched w ch Ormysenes 
china wares & velvette are to fa bought att Bantam of the 

Chineses much better cheepe then English velvettf . Read or 
stamells English Cloth as aboue aboute 10. 12 
or 14 s star the yarde, Royalls of 8, for all w ch we 

shall buie Ryse, Indico Lapes Bezar w ch theare in aboundance 

are to be hadd. 

The Rice you may carry from hence to Amboyna and Banda 
where you may gett for yt any sorte of spices 

Rise good wares to ? J ' J ,. 

buyeheare. before all wares that can be carried thither, or 

for w ch you may gett any lading theare. 

The are heathen people but verie good people to deale w th all 

Heathen but a good & tO liuG ty : alld ^ d G h ld S d F ^ ht & 

people & good iustice. i us ti c e & order after their manner 

Glasses kniues. Glasses to driiike in, lookeing glasses & kniues 

are there well requested. 



THIS Hand of Botonar 3 are some good slaues 




A discripcon of "" "~~ fc>~~~ * 

the i land of Bot- thither brought from lava for Slaues for 
heare the buie and sell Slaues as a good 
china dishes. m r chandize China dishes or Puselen* of all sort? of 

India clothes. t h e finest Clothes I meane India Cloth [es c] ailed 

Tenexto 5 or Tannies 6 are heare well requested. 

1 Tzidle (0. C. 35). See note n on page 73. 

2 Also spelled armozeen, armosyn, and armesie (from the Italian ortnisino, 
" sarcanet," "taffeta-sarcenet," see Florio's Worlds ofWordes); originally a stout black 
silk much used in the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries for making " Geneva gowns " 
and for funeral scarfs, but afterwards dyed of various colours. 

3 Botton (O. C. 35). Boeton, or Buton, an island to the south-west of Celebes. 

4 Porcelain, 5 Teneyte (0. C. 35). 6 Tanyes (0. C. 35), 




78 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Clothes, english Clothes, Read, stamels, velvette of all 
manner of sorte & work? of the finest Damaskes 

veluetts and Taffeties. . ' , 

& Taffeties, (not english silke) well requested. 
Theis Damaskf & Taffeties as some men saie are alsoe made att 
Damaske & carried to Bantam, & soe to the Moloccos 

A DISCRIPTION of the Hand of Seran 1 
|N THIS Hand of Seran falleth noe other wares then 
Segu, 2 w ch is of a tree in the Hand of Banda, is well 
requested, & is their bread & they cannot want 3 yt. 
Therefore is caried from hence thither and sold to 
great proffitt, men sell theare theis kinde of Indie Clothes. 
Madmayrensf Sallallo, Kassa, Dragon, Patta, Kantekey, Bassa, 5 
kreyckam Brasse peeces of Ordinance like bases 6 
haueing Chambers in the breeches w ch brasse 
peeces are made in China well formed & are to be bought att 
peces & head Bantam, longe peeces snaphances such as are in 
the f ormer pte hereof, described head peeces 
white, graven and guilt & Corslett^ are here well requested. 

But note in this Hand there is nothinge to be had for retourne 
for o r Countrie yet store of Sagu for to make bread to be sold to 
good pfitt onelie att Banda. 

EARE followeth the Table of the India clothes as we 
call Clothes named in the former parte hereof and 
how to know them to witt. 

Tzinde, are silke Clothes w th dead 7 stripes. 
Patta, katnynen w th read stripes ou r thwarte through. 
Dragon, blacke and Read. 
Sallallo, blew & blacke. 
Basta are white & blacke, starched & foulded vpp fower square. 

1 A large island to the north of the Banda Group, lying between Boeroe and 
New Guinea. 

2 Sago. 4 Madynrens (0. C. 35). 

3 Do without. 5 Bastau (0. C. 35). 

6 The smallest kind of cannon used in the i6th and i7th centuries. It weighed 
about 200 Ibs., had a bore of an inch and a quarter, and threw a ball Ib. in weight. 

7 Read (0. C. 35). Sindi cloth (oivS&v of the Greeks, and sadin of Proverbs 
xxxi. 24, Isaiah iii. 23, and Judges xiv. 12 and 13.) 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 79 

Kassa are white vnstarched lawnes. 

Kreckam, is Read starched. 

Kantekey, black starched. 

Mossaffey is black of the same, starched. 

Toorya not starched, are painted like as the Sarassa but are 
verie Course. 

Borne Laya, are w th white & blacke quarles 1 or Checkers like as 
Poliyng kintsy. 2 

Paw are silke Clothes w th freing^ 3 att the end w th little quarles 
of checo r through. 

Theis foresaid Clothes as we call them are all tymes well to 
be had att Bantam, yett att some tymes better 
Bantam buTmade In then att other some : but are made in Bengalla 
att Mesapatania 4 S* Thome Cheremandalla. 

Royalls 

Dragon y e Cody or Cordge 040 Royals 

Patta the Cordge 055 Royalls 

Kassa the Gorge 080 Royals 

Tzyle the Gorge 070 Royalls 

Sarassa the Gorge 100 Royalls 

Gobber the Gorge 120 Royals 

Tsidnde the Gorge 140 Royalls 

Kntsy paw 5 the Gorge 093 Royals 

Blatty the Gorge 060 Royals 

Moredie y e Cordge or Codie 030 Royals 

Maduyevs 6 y e Gorge 013 

Baffata y e Cordge 100 

Kantekey y e Gorge 020 

Mosaffey y e Gorge 032 

Toria the Gorge 016 

Kneckam 7 the Gorge 025 

Polinge the Gorge 035 

Borne ladye the Gorge 030 

1 Quarl or quarrel, a square (Low Lat. qwdrillus, quarellus, N. Fr. quarel) ; the term 
was also applied to diamond-shape panes of glass. 

2 Polinge knytsy (0. C. 35). 5 Knyt sipan (0. C, 35). 
8 Prayings. 6 Maduyres (O. C. 35). 

See note 10, p. 73. 7 Kreykam (O. C. 35). 



8o FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Note the Cody or Gorge is a bondell or set nomber of 20 
peeces. 

Theis are the preces that the will yeald at Banda & other 
places of the Molloccos as this now saith And o r ffactor[s] 
Thomas Browne & Woodnoth who were att the Moloccos cann 
more better & more fullie enforme you. 

But at the places where theis are made & bought aboue 
mencioned they are much better Cheepe 

The waightf of Banda and Amboyna as the dutchman hath 
written but beleeue yt not w th out tryall because yt agreeth not to 
Anthonie Writes & o r other ffacto 1 ' 3 Accompt?, neither did we 
finde yt to fall out soe, by o r last Cloues. 

In Banda 10 Catty 1 is one Inland? or that Countrie Barr or 
one Barr of that place. 100 Catty one Portugalls Barr maketh 
Hollande weight 537! . 2 

In Amboyna 50 Barratt is on Portug? Barr w ch maketh 55o u 
Hollande. 

One Amboynes barr 20 Barrett?, i Barrett u u Holland? this 
I vnderstand not. 

In Bantam one Sacke of pepp maketh 60 3 Hollend?. The 
weight of Rice is accordinge to the Barr to witt. 

In Banda & Amboyna 6 11 Holland? 1 . 

In Marcassar 7" Hollend? & 800 maketh I I 
koyem* as the Inhabitant? there call yt J wei ht ' 

NOTES 5 BY m'.Co : 6 whoe sayled theis waies as he said 

Note that vpon the sholes of India by S* Lawrence when you 
haue 80. or go ffaddam, then looke out for the fflatt? 7 are neere 

1 A Chinese weight, the denomination of which, kati, is Malay, equal to a little 
over one pound avoirdupois. 

2 537 n J (0. C. 35). 3 6ott (0. C. 35). 4 Coem (0. C. 35). 

5 Extracts from these notes are given in 0. C. 35. 

6 A Dutchman who had taken part, it would seem, in the second voyage of 
Steven van der Hagen (Dec., 1603), whose route agrees generally with that here 
laid down. Possibly " m r . Co:" may be Hendric Jacobsz. Compostel, who was an 
" opperkoopman " in that voyage (see Jonge's Opkomst van het Nederl : Gezag in Oost- 
Indie, Vol. III.). 

1 Seepage 118, 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 81 

therefore cary but small sayle yf yt be in the night : but yf in 
the daye you shall see the Sea breake on the Rockf & broken 
grounde you may Anco r in saffetie betweene the twoe Ilandf, 
and the third Hand is the mayne Hand where is noe good thinge 
but water. 

When you soyle to Monsombeeke 1 you must goe beyond 

Mosombeeke ^ e Roade and come backe againe w th in because 

of the shoels & there you shall ryde in fiue fadam 

faire ground vnder the Hand right agaynst the Castle, haueing 

vpon yo r starboard the Hand & larboard side 

tinge ng t e o Mosom* the Castle Then you must sayle betweene the 

w*unS!3fofj 3 " shoels and th[e] land to come vnto the Roade of 

Monsombeeke being there the people of the land 

& Portugalls will come aboard you. 

When o r shipps come (yf yt please God) to Mosombeeke in the 
Roade there will come abourde the people of the land & Portugalls, 
the Portugals beleeue not, neither trust the Countrie people too 
farr, they of the Countrie will bringe you (yf you please) beyond 
the Castle wheare the Portugall is . then shall you haue the 
Inhabitant^" come aboard you w th their Comodities followinge. 

Amber greece Gould Oliphaunt^ teeth & Indico but that Indico 
is of no great value but verie Course. 

wares for vs to buie. _. . ,. , . . . . 

The m r chandize you carne thither is blew 

Callicoes & diu r s other wares made aboute Bengalla English 

wares Tynn, Iron, Steele leade pennie kniues 

wares for vs to sell. V> Vl, j i 

scissers, Rasers, w ch must be verie good, longe 
peecf w th match, Pistols Rapeires but noe swordf lookeing 
glasses & beadf 

ffrom Mosombeeke saile vpp to Sanzabar, 3 there you may ride 

in good ground, but verie deepe & halfe a league 

from the shore but come noe nerer to the Land 

but 40 fadam for there is fowle ground, you shall haue there, 

hoggf Goatf Hemp greate store, Orrenges, Lemans, baffeildf , 4 

Potato 13 , Plantanns and Maskinilliacos, 5 & all manner of refreshinge 

1 Mozambique. 3 Zanzibar. 

2 The well known work by J. H. van Linschoten. 4 Buffaloes. 

6 No meaning can be assigned to this word ; it is possibly the name of some kind 
Of fruit, 

G 



82 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

good victuals. f or apeece of Iron a paire of Sissers, or small 

triffles you shall haue a buffeild or other good victualls 

ffrom Sanzabar sayle to Pember 1 leaueing PemB on the 
larboard side & soe sailinge 20 or 30 leagues 
from the shoare all along to the Hand of 
Allasackatrina 2 w ch is neare to the Redd Sea. In w ch Hand of 
as Allasakatrina are good harbo" faire depth and good 
3wS! Ancho r ground and aboundaunce of good victualls 

good Harbor. ( nQte they went not int() the Read g ea> [ )] 

ffrom Allasackatrina they tooke their Course directlie to 
Cambaya but that was onelie to take a prize & 

Cambaya. . r ^ 

not for traffique. 

ffrom the Coaste of Cambaya the sayled into the riuer Goa 
Goa. they were at & aboute Goa the latter end 

of October & staied three weekes or amonneth & had faire 
weather. 

At the entrie of the riuer Goa are 2 Castles verie stronge well 
appointed w th verie greate Ordenaunce the shott bullettf of 50" 
and the people of the Towne of Goa, & all the Countrie 6 leagues 
aboute are vnder the Gou r nm te of the Portugalls & will not by any 
meanes displease the Portugalls nor traffique w th any people but 
the Portugalls onely, but will rather betraye all men, yea even the 
Spanniardf in reguard of the Portugals They sayled round 
aboute the towne & Ilandf of Goa and fought w th diuers vessells 
and ffriggettf soe that in this towne there is noe traffique to be 
looked for. 

ffrom Cambaya the sailed all alonge the Coaste w th in saker 8 
shott of the shoare vntill they came to Cananor they 
were besett w th ffriggettf & gallies of the Portu- 
galls but of noe greate force, but they Inhabitant^ of the Coun- 
trie did come abourd them eu r y daie all alongst 
the Coast to traffique bringing to them theis 
Comodities 4 

1 Pemba. 

2 Socotra, a confusion of the name of the island with that of its best-known 
product, Aloes Socotrina. 

3 A saker was a piece of ordnance of 3^ inches bore, with a range of about 
1700 paces. 

4 A paragraph seems to have been omitted here, 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 83 

Rialls of 8, pistolls longe peeces, rapyers, but noe swordf. All 

w ch they sell againe to the Portugalls because the 

Portugalls will buie nothinge of vs Hollenders 

Take vnsacked lyme & beate yt to powder, & lay yt vpon a 

HOW to trie yo* lynnen cloth then wett yo r Bezar vpon yo r 

tongue, & rub yt vpon the lyme dust yf yt geue 

any Coullo r it is false, but yf yt geue noe Colo r it is right & good. 

ffrom Cananor the sayled all alonge the Coast of Malabar by 

the Samarins 1 Countrie toward^ Callicutt in all 

w ch Coast the people of the Countrie will come 

nS ar tiS the Hoi- abourd & traffique w th you bringing theis Como- 

STot^foifi" dities ffollowing Viz pearles Rubies Saphers Dia- 

mondf & many other good thingf but in any 

hand goe not ashoare to trust them. The 

people will lie abourd the shipps 2 or 3 daies & traffique w th 

you, but are very subtill in their trade, they must be vsed 

very kindlie & they will tell you all thingf how to bewraye the 

Portugalls. 

A present is needfull to be sent to the k. of Samarins, being a 
man of verie greate power & noe freind to the 
Portugall but an enimie, and heere many thingf 
will be brought you from the shoare of all kinde of stones & 
pearles, & other good thingf. A present for this k. of the Sama- 
rins would be verie needfull w ch should be of theis thingf ffollow- 
inge. Guilded head peecf , some Muskettf , & 5 or 6 barrels of 
powder. 

Theis English wares ffollowinge are good to sell theare. 

Lead, Tynn, Iron, peecf of 8, pouder, rapiers, 

English wares. , 

& head peeces 

The kinge [of] Canano r is greater than the kinge of Callicutte 
and is thought to be noe freinde w th the Portugalls but rather an 
enimie & hath alsoe warrs w th the kinge of Callicutte. 

The k. of Callicutt is in subjection to the Portugalls there- 
the k. of caiiicutt. fore beware 

1 The Zamorin, i.e. Samudri, lord "of the Sea," was the petty Hindu king of 
Calicut and the dependent countryside, 

C I 



84 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

ffrom Callicui saile towards the Cape of Comorem but edg 

out of the sight of the land to the Sea that you might not 

come in sight of the Cape of Comorem & soe 

The Cape Commorim. t . _ ., 

take towardes Selland 1 not comemg too neere 

into the bay because of an indraught that sett in : and 

take yo r Course straight to the riuer of Columba* 

in Selland where theare stand f a small forte of 

noe force, neither can yt annoy you. 

Heare you shall buie theis Comodities followinge of the 
Inhabitant^ of Selland not of the Portugalls in noe wyse. 

Synamon for this is the onelie place for Synaman, pearles 
indie wares Rubies & some other stones, ffor theis stones 

you may sell theare theis Comodities ffollowinge, 
English wares ffine Callicoes, powder & peec? lead & Tynn. 

Take yo r Synamon and beate yt in a morter to fine powder 
HOW to choose when yo u haue soe done, sett a pott of water 

Synamon. ypon the fier & J ett yt g eeth then put J n & 

handfull or twoe of yo r beaten Synamon & lett yt seeth a while, 
& yf yt hange together like lyme it is naught but yf yt be good 
it will not hang together. 

ffrom the Coast of Selland saile to Sumatra, & soe come in 
sight of the land, sayling all alonge the Coste 

From Selland to , . ., , , . i? ,-11 

Sumatra and to Ban- keepmge the land in sight, vntill you come neere 
the sholes, w ch sholes lie in the height of 2 
degrees to the Southward of the equinoctiall. Then edge of 
to the Seaward for feare of the sholes then being cleere of 
them put into the mainland againe goinge w th in the Hand & 
soe alonge all the Coastf, till you come to the straight^ of 
Sonday & soe to Bantam. 

Att Cowcheen 8 w dl is a place neere Callicutt is stoare of 
pepp diu r s kinde of Goomes Pearles Diamond^ 

Comodities of Cow . , . _ _ .111, i r 

cheen neere Caiii- Rubies & Bezar stones All w ch are brought from 

cutt. 

Goa & more quantitie then att Goa 

M r C. saith for truth that all the Countrie of Guzarattf & 
the k. himselfe, are greatelie subiect to the 
Portugalls and dare not doe any thinge to dis- 

1 Ceylon, 2 Colombo, 3 Cochin, 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 85 

please the Portugalls. And alsoe the Guzarattf do saile in the 
Portugalls shipps in eu r y pte of the East Indies therefore he 
thinketh that the Guzarattf & Portugalls will rather betray vs 
then deale honestlie w th vs. 

In all the Countrie of Bengalla (wherein Mosopotania, 1 is a 

Cheefe Cittie) are made all the stuffes that we 

Carrie to the Moloccos & are there to be had 

exceeding Cheepe, theis blew peeces of 14 yards as m r C. saith 

Mesopotania are to be bought in Bengalla for f a Royall of 

Cheramandalla c * * 

s* Thome. 8 or 3 of them for 2 Royalls of 8, but theis 

stuff? are made cheeflye vp in the Countrie frome the Townes 

St Thome & Cheramandalla are alsoe in Bengalla, & there 
are all those Pinthados & other stuff? made w ch we carrie to 
Moloccos. 

In Bengalla we vtter theis englishe Comodities 
Ryalls of 8 cheeflie, Iron small gaddf 2 of steele Tynn in 
small barrs, or little peeces & leade he knoweth 
gaddes of steele not whether English Cloth will sell, all kinde of 
munition will sell exceedinge well in Bengalla & 
mesopotania 

Theis people are not subiect to the Portugalls, but the 
Free trade in Meso- Portugalls dwell in Mesopotamia & soe haue the 
fflemingf a factorie theare, and all men may 
tramque here freelie. 

There are many kingdomes in Bengalla, but the Cittie of 
att Betania English Mesopotamia is the Cheeffest Cittie English cloth 
cioth, kersies. or rat h er kersies doe sell viz : Stamells Venice 

redd?, & blewes. 

Head peeces that are full of Studdf & a place to put a 
fether behinde and alsoe some grauen & some 
guilt will sell in barter for Cloues exceeding 

trade of the Moloccos 111 i j * i A f r^ 

read at larg in my Well I alsO6 longC pCCCCS dagg? 3 Diatf of Copper 

other booke written . . . - TT - . - , , 

oniie of the Moi- such as we bring from Hambrowe 4 yf you sould 
not aboue 4 or 500 peeces will sell well, but you 

1 See note 10, page 73. 

1 In Phillips' New World of Words a gad of steel is explained as "a small piece 
of steel to heat in the fire, and quench in any liquor " (quoted in Hares' Glossary). 
3 Pistols. 4 Hamburg (Hamborough). 



86 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

must lett them see but a few att a tyme, heere the people must 
be kindlie vsed and you shall haue freindshipp. But o r ffactor 
Thomas Brown [e] being Churlish & rude to them, they would not 
deale w th him but foboure to our greate losse for he thought 
he should be churlish to them as he was att Bantam, but they 
people are not such. 

Take apinte of Sallet oyle & a pound of Leade dust, being 

Howtopreseruelron VGrie fine Y 011 mUSt haUG the finest file aS Y OU Can 
toolesfromrustinge. gett to make the dust small> m i ng l e the Said dust 

and Oyle together apound of leade w th a pinte Oyle, being thus 
mingled lett them stand amonth and the leade will be dissolued 
into the Oyle Then take a Cloth & dipp into the Oyle & wipe 
the edg tooles therew tb & yt will keepe them or any Iron, & 
steele from rustinge. 



|O ALL THOSE 1 to whome theis presentf shall come 
of what degree & Condicon soeu r we the Companie 
of English marchauntf for the discou r y of new 
trades, & of the East India Companie send greetinge 
Whereas w th the Consent & likeing of his ma tie & the priuie 
councell, we haue intertayned the bearer hereof 

A passe to lonn 

K , ni ht or discouer y lohn Knight & his Companie to vndertake and 

of the Norwest pas- 

sad e e - attempte the pformaunce & discou r y of c r teyne 

places, as we haue geuen him Order, & haue prepared and solie 
Comitted a small shipp called the hopewell vnto the Cardge of 
the said lohn Knight to the same end & purpose & to noe other 
effect. Theis are therefore to intreate & desier you, & eu r y of 
you to pmitt & suffer the said lohn Knight w th the said shipp & 
Companie freelie and quietlie to passe w th out any yo r lett 

1 Knight's voyage in search of the North- West Passage was undertaken in 1606. 
The Hopewell crossed the Atlantic in safety, and reached the coast of Labrador, where 
Knight and three others landed, and were never seen or heard of again. The sur- 
vivors returned to England in September, 1606. Knight's journal of the expedition, 
which is still preserved among the India Office Records, has been published by 
Mr. C. R. Markham as an appendix to his Voyages of Sir James Lancaster (Hakluyt 
Society, 1877). 





THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 87 

hindraunce or molestacon. In testimonie whereof wee haue 
caused the seu r all seales of o r Companies herevnto to be fixed. 
London the io th of Aprill 1606. And in the 4 th yeare of the 
reigne of o r Sou r eigne Lo: lames by the grace of God k. ol 
greate Brittan ffraunce & Ireland defendo r of the faith &c : 



|HEARAS we [are] aduised that one of o r East India 
shipps 1 is entred into the Porte of Plymoth, one other 
neare the lie of wight : & the 3 lefte in the sounding^ 
& we doe not knowe what state the said shipps are 

in but doubt they are weeke of men victuals and other pvisions. 

A comission to goe ^ or better Comforte and releueing of them and 

prouWe necelsari^ theil> WEIltf W6 haUC intreated yOU & 13 & (ft B 

w th all expedicon to repaier to the said porte of 

Plimoth or there aboute where any of the said shipps shall be 

arriued, & doe your best endevo 1 ' 8 aswell to puide 

* r SUC k mei1 aS y U S ^ a ^ fin d e t0 k 6 S i C k e & n0t 

not able to endure the present passadge by Sea : 
as alsoe all things w ch shall be necessarie for the rest of the men 
and for pvisions of all wantf of of the said shipps. And for yo r 
better Assistaunce herein (yf need be) you are in the Companies 

name to intreate any lawfull favo 1 ' from the Officers 

Theis men had also * 

warrants wth them o f j^g ma ties s hipps. & others for men Anchors 

from m r Garway to f f ' 

ckfaste r fbr r proLion Cables &c i And furder that nothinge be 
of money. ymbecillcd taken carried or conveyed out of the 

said shipps by any pson whatsoeu 1 ': wee pray you to make yo r 
retourne backe againe in such shipp as you shall soe first light on 
for the more ease of such as came in the same now wearied 
w th longe & tedious trouble of Sea & weather. Prouided yf you 
shall happen to light of 2 of the said shipps in one place or not 
farr distaunt. That then in such case we desire you to deuide 
yo r selues each to either shipp for prouiding & doing as aforesaid. 

1 The home-coming ships of Middleton's expedition (Second Voyage, 1604-6). 
The Rtd Dragon was off Plymouth on 2nd May, 1606, and both she and the Assertion 
were in the Downs on the sixth of the same month. (Voyage of Sir Henry Middleton, 
Hakluyt Society, 1857.) 




88 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

And alsoe yf you shall heeare of any thinge to be taken out of the 
said shipps by any whosoeu r , you shall vse the best meanes you 
may for recou r y & obtayneing thereof agayne for thuse of the 
Companie. And whatsoeu r you shall doe in effectinge of this 
busines for the good of the Companie we doe by this o r Comission 
ratifie Confirme & allow. Giuen vnder the seale of o r Companie 
the 7 th of May 1606. 



|EE THE Comitties for the East India Companie : & 
the principalls of the Porters whose names are 
heerevnder subscribed doe Couenaunte and agree in 
forme followinge. Viz : That the said Comitties doe 
pmyse, in the name of the said Companye to pay vnto the said 
Theagreemtwththe porters for slinging, Graying, loading in & out of 
porters - Carte, carrying, wayghing, & stoweing in the 

warehowse or Sello appointed for the said Companies goodf, 
and all other thingf necessary to this effect the some of 
for eu r y Hoggeshed, & for eu r y bagg baile & 
Canister the some of . In Consideracon of w ch 

seu r all somes the said Porters for them & eu r y of them 
Covenant pmyse & agree to and w th the said Comitties. 
That they the said Porters shall att their own pp chardge 
slinge Craine lade in & and out of Carte & Cartf, & Carrie 
weighe and stowe the said Companies goodf now to be 
vnladen out of the shipps latelie arriued, or cause the same to 
be done in manner as aforesaid And alsoe to satisfie the said 
Companie for whatsoeu 1 ' damadge shall happen to the same 
good by the default or ymbecilm* of the said Porters or any 
other whome they shall appointe to this busines, either in 
Graying or while the same goodf shall be vnder their power 
or service to be done in the premisses. And furder to stow & 
lade on bourde the lighters all such emptie Caske, and other 
thinge as shall be needfull to be ymployed for puision for the 
same goodf, w tb out demaundeinge any thinge for the same. 
And moreou r for the better satisfaccon & indempnitie of the said 
Companie shall before they doe ymploye any pson whatsoeu 1 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 89 

aboute this busines giue vnto the said Comitties a Catlogue or 
scrowle of all the names of such as they shall soe sett on worke. 
And to conclude yt is furder agreed by & betweene the said 
pties that yf att any time in the doing of this service the said 
Porters, or any of or for them shall be founde negligent or 
vnfaithfull, that yt shall be free for the said Comitties to make 
choyse of others att their wills & pleasure. Vnto the pform- 
ance of the same wee & eu r y of vs doe binde o r selues by theis 
p r sent . wherevnto we haue sett o r handf the loth of May 1606. 



THE AGREEMENT w th the Wharffenger. 

[HIS BYLL Wittnesseth. That yt is couenanted con- 
cluded & agreed betweene Thomas Watson wharf- 
enger of Custome howse & woll keys, & the Comitties 
for the East India Companie in forme followinge. viz. 
That the said Comitties, doe promyse to pay vnto the said Tho. 
Watson or his assignes for lighteridge wharffedg 
and Cranadge all & other thinge necessarie to 
this effect the some of 3 d for eu r y bagg baile Canister hoggeshead 
or Caske. In Consideracon whereof the said 3T 2E. doth for 
himselfe & his Assignes Couenaunte pmyse & agree to and w th 
the said Comitties That he the said : TO: att his owne pp 
Coste & chardges shall finde sufficient stanch & stronge lighters 
and able Craines and men for carry inge & Crayinge of the said 
Companies goodes now to be vnladen out of their shipps latelie 
arriued in the Riuer of Thames, And furder to satisfie the said 
Companie for whatsoeu r damadge shall happen vnto the same 
goodes by the insufficiencie of any th lighters or Craines, Crayne 
Ropes or slyngf he shall sett a worke or by the default or 
vnfaithfullnes of any pson whatsoeu r he shall ymploye aboute 
the same lighters Craines or wharffes or any of them. And 
further to carrie abourd the said Companies shipps in his said 
lighters all such baggf emptie Caske & other thinge as shall be 
needfull to be imployed for the same goodf w th out demaunding 
any thinge for the same. And to Conclude it is furder agreed 



90 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

by & betwene the said pties, that yf att any tyme in the 
pformance of the premisses the said 3L OTt. shall be found to 
deale otherwyse then shall be fittinge for the good of the 
Companie : Or yf any other will serue the Companie in this 
respect from blackwall better cheepe then is formerlie agreed 
vpon That then and in such case it shalbe free for the said 
Comitties to make choyse of others, or to ymploie the said 
ST. Q8H. still att their will and pleasures vnto the pformance 
whereof we doe binde o r selues by this o r present writtinge. 
And in Witnes of the same, we haue therevnto sett o r hand? 
the io th of May 1606. 




mr Kealing 1 heereinclosed we doe send 
you the Bill of lading of the money and appell laden 
in that shipp the Suzan together w th a generall Invoice 
aswell of all the money & good? in the 4 shipps as 
alsoe of all that w ch form r lie remaned in the Countrie of the 
Aseuerainrewththe East Indies to thend both you and all the ffacto 18 

5 & shlpp yce froS there ma Y take knowledge & see what they 
Grauesend. haue in chardge for the better ordering and dis- 
poseing whereof both you & they are to follow such direccon as 
we haue alredie sufficientlie & att lardge geuen you in o r ires 

6 Comission wherein we nothinge doubt of yo r due care & 
Consideracon eu r y one of you in his place in dischardg of yo r 
duties accordinge to that trust we doe repose in you. Thus 
wishing you a faire winde to be bound we comend vs vnto you, 
& Comitt you & all yo r Companie to the most safe pteccon 
of the highest whoe send you a safe & speedie passadge to yo r 
desired porte & graunte vs a happie meetinge to god? glorie 
& to o r Comfort? &c. In Grauesend the 25 th of March 1604. 
Signed by S r Thomas Smyth. 



1 Then setting out for the Indies in command of the Susan, in the Second Voyage 
(see note 2, page 51). 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. gl 

A REMEMBRANCE 1 for Gabriell Towerson Robert Browne, 

George Woodnoth, Henrie Sydall & lohn Saires the first of 

Octoft 1605. in Bantam. 

JHE FIRSTE thinge you are to haue care of after the 
deptinge of the shipps is to gett workemen to ou r see all 
the decayed places of yo r ware howses & to see them 
sufftcientlie reped & to remoue all the carriadges w th 
such lumber of Timber as lieth scattered aboute the yarde, into 
some warehowse to avoide the daunger of fyer 2 

S<- Henrie Middle- * 

tons remembrances other wyse yt is verie doubtfull all both howse 

left att Bantam and . 

the names and wages & goodf will be lost, & in any Case lett not att 

of those theare. * 

any tyme any thinge apte to take fyer he neere 
the warehowse doores that thereby you be not debarred to 
sucker yt, yf need shall requier. 

ALSOE I thinke yt fitt you sell such lava goodf as are likelie 
of pishing for pepp yf you thinke you cann make sale thereof to 
the Companies pffitt either to the Hollenders or China lunckf , 
when they shall come hithere And not to bestowe the chardge of 
Clensing it, but to sell yt as yt cometh to yo r handf . If not to 
sell for Royalls & such moneys as you shall make thereof to be 
putt out to the Companies pffitt, as in yo r good discrecon you 
shall thinke most meete : And for those good^ brought backe by 
me frome the Molloccos w th some other in the warehowse, w dl 
will better sell theare then heare, as m r Browne and m r Wood- 
noth Can best informe you, I would not that any of them should 
be sould theare, but be carefullie looked vrito that the perish not 
for lacke of eareing 3 : And yf the Hecto 1 ' and Suzan should 
retourne agayne as I make small doubt by godf helpe but they 
will, you maie doe as you & them that come in them shall thinke 
most meete : But my opinion is the greater shipp is fittest to 
take in the goodf & pceede for the Molloccos for that I doubt not 

1 Sir Henry Middleton set sail from Bantam on his homeward voyage on 
6th October, 1605. This "Remembrance" has been printed by Mr. Bolton Corney 
in his Voyage of Sir Henry Middleton (Hakluyt Society, 1857). 

2 For the prevalence of fires both incendiary and accidental at Bantam, and 
the anxiety thus occasioned to the English factors, see Edmond Scot's account in 
Purchas before quoted. 

3 Airing. 



92 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

there will be Molloccos goodf enough in yo r warehowse to lade 
her w th Cloues. Yo u are to haue greate care you make noe debt? 
but such as you may att all tymes, after the expectacon of o r 
shipps w dl will be aboute 18 monnethes hence, haue in att 2 or 
3 monnethes warninge : the reason is I am pswaded they will 
bring such order from the Company to cleare all matters out of 
the Countrie wherein they beare soe greate a venture w th out 
proffitt And therefore aboute that tyme you may haue made sale 
of all the lava wares in the howse to be ymployed in pepp or any 
other Comoditie w ch you thinke may rebound to the Companies 
most pffitt. 

AND wheareas m r Gabriell Towerson 1 I am possessed w tb a 
conceite of yo r discrecon & good gou r nm te I haue made choyse of 
you to be Commaunder ouer all this place, but to take the 
Councell & aduice of m r Browne, 2 m r Woodnoth, m r Sydall, and 
m r Saires 3 in all matters that the Companie maie be the better 
assured of all thingf that passeth 

AND yf yt please god to laye his hand vpon you m r Towerson 
& take you out of this world I would haue you to giue ouer your 
place to m r Browne, and yf you Robert Browne should die then 
to m r Woodnoth, & yf you George Woodnoth shall die they 4 
yt shall rest in your discrecon to make yo r choyse of m r Sydall 
& m r Sayrs w cb of they 2 you thinke fittest for such a place 
allwayes haueing a care to leaue yo r busynes in the best & 
playnest manner you can : alsoe I doe appointe you m r Browne 
to be booke keep for all matters in this place. 

AND for soe much as they last voyadge there was noe order 
p r scribed by the Generall to such m r chauntf as he left there for 



1 See note 2, page 33. 2 See note i, page 52. 

3 John Saires, Sayers or Saris, here mentioned as being left as a factor at Bantam 

by Sir Henry Middleton, wrote an account of events there from October, 1605, to 

October, 1609, which is printed in Purchas. The next heard of him is in 1611, when 

he took command of the ships of the Eighth Voyage (1611-14) in the course of which 

he opened up trade with Japan, establishing a factory at Firando in 1613. In June, 

1616, a factor at that place writing to another at Miako mentions that Capt. Saris 

"hath married Mr. Mexses daughter in Whitechapel ; it is thought he shall come out 

"commander this year of the best fleet that ever came to the East Indies" 

"> C. 371) ; but, as a matter of fact, he was not again employed by the Company. 

(se& slip for "then." 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 93 

the keeping of each one his pticular estate in writeing soe that 
thereby they seemed to neglect the same as by proofe we finde 
for not any of the deceased haue left anie writeinge concerninge 
their owne estatf behinde them Therefore I doe ordeyne that 
eu r y m r chaunt left heere by me doe keepe an Accompt of his 
owne busines for the better satisfieing of the Companie & his 
freindf , to whome he shall bequeath his goodf yf yt please God 
to call him out of this lyfe. 

You are to be verie carefull for the ou r lookeing of all yo r 
goodf , & soe 1 that you suffer them not lie neere the grounde for yf 
they doe, yt will both roote them, & breed wormes in them as by 
experience we haue founde, & looke that once a mometh all the 
goods be carried out to eareinge & in soe doeinge I hope 
nothinge will come to losse. 

YOU are alsoe to vse good husbandrie in chardges of howse 
keepinge for that the Companie are att greate Chardge to mayn- 
tayne soe many men vpon soe small a stocke & what puision 
is bought for the howse my will is that there be noe ptialitie 
therein but lett all the m r chaunt fare be alike & not some to 
haue Comaund & the rest be w th out. 

MY desire is that you endeuo r yo r selues to hold freindshipp 
w th the Hollenders & suffer noe euill speeches to passe by them by 
anie of our people & although the meaner sorte of them be rude 
I finde that their Commaunders be desirous to lyue in amitie 
& loue w th vs. 2 Therefore yf you heare any matter p r tendinge att 
any tyme against them by the people of the Countrie that you 
aduertise them thereof, for they haue pmised on their behalfe to 
doe the like, for yf the people of the Countrie pceaue we be linked 
in one : they will be advised how they attempt any thinge agaynst 

1 See? 

2 On the first appearance of the English in the Eastern Seas, they were received 
in very friendly manner by the Dutch, as the two nations were in alliance at home, 
and were both threatened, as well in Europe as in the Indies, by the formidable 
power of the King of Spain. "It is to be noted," says Edmond Scot, " that though 
" we [the Dutch & English factors at Bantam] were mortall enemies in our Trade, 
" yet in all other matters we were friends, and would haue liued and dyed one for 
" the other." As the Portuguese power died away, and commercial rivalry increased, 
bitter feelings arose between the former allies, culminating in the brutal execution 
of the English factors at Amboyna in 1623 ; and thenceforward all real friendship 
between th,e two nations was at an end. 



94 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

any of o r Nations. Therefore you must be carefull there be noe 
occasions Offered on o r behalfe : and looke what order o r late 
Gen r all S r lames Lancaster left for the paym* of menns wages 
herein this place I doe hold yt most ffitt the same order be 
obserued still, onelie you are to paye noe wag? to Lawrence the 
Surgion & Edward Ellimore, who be not their owne men but 
servant? & therefore they must att all tymes be soe plied 1 by you 
of all such thing? as the shall necessarie wante & the rest of the 
wages to be reserued to thuse of their m rs whome they serue. 

IF there be any of the meaner sorte of men I meane saue 
the m r chauntf that shall misbehaue them selues toward? you 
m r Towerson or any of the m r chaunt or otherwyse yt shall rest 
in yo r discrecon to ponish them whereby they may reforme them 
selues, & as for the m r chauntf I leue them w th yo u I know their 
discrecon to be such that I dare vndertake they will giue noe 
occasionn of offence. 

THUS desiering you all to Hue in vnitie and loue together & 
to beare one w th another, & not to take eu r y thinge att the worste 
that shall be spoken & that you meete altogether att morneing 
and att eueninge prayer, & soe doeing god will blesse & psper all 
you take in hand & soe I take my leaue of you prayinge god to 
saue blesse & defend you all Amen. 

THE NAMES of the men w th their wagf left by me Henrie 
Middleton att Bantam beginyng their paie the first day of 
October 1605. 

m r Gabriell Towerson 6 U p monneth . . . o6 u oo 3 oo d 

m r Robert Browne 6 11 p monneth ... 06 oo oo 

George Woodnoth 3 U 6 s 8 d p monneth ... 03 06 08 

lohn Sayers 3 U 6 3 8 d p monneth 03 06 08 

Henrie Sydall 3 U 6 8 p monneth 03 06 08 

Richard Cotton i u 5 s oo p monneth ... 01 05 oo 

Lawrence Sturdynan 23 s p monneth ... 01 03 oo 

Richard Claxan 24* p monneth 01 04 oo 

lohn Delane 22 s p monneth 01 02 oo 

lohn Bemunde 26* p monneth 01 06 oo 

Edward Preston 2O 8 p monneth 01 oo oo 

Supplied. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 95 

Edward Collenes 22 s p monneth oi 02 oo 

lohn Smyth 22 s 5 monneth oi 02 oo 

Matthew Price 24 s p monneth oi 04 oo 

lames More 24 s p monneth oi 04 oo 

Michaell Martin 26 s monneth oi 06 oo 

Edward Elsmore 28 p monneth oi 08 oo 

Austen Spaulden 1 26 s p monneth oi 06 oo 




COMPUTACON of the chardge for setting forth to 
Sea vpon a third voyadge to Bantam & the Mol- 
loccos vpon a new accompte, and for discou r y of 
furder trade & other places w th the Dragon Hecto r 
and a Pinnace as ffolloweth. viz. 

THE DRAGON. 

Dragon. INPRIMIS the stocke in the 

East Indies to be paied for 3ooo 1! oo 3 oo d 
THE price of the Dragon by 

appraiser^ amounted to ... 2400 16 oo 
her repaier & chardgf in 

setting forth will coste . . . 4770 oo oo 

Her victualls 2895 oo oo 

Imprest to men 0784 oo oo 

13849 16 oo 

1 Augustine Spalding, interpreter at Bantam, appears to have gone out with Lan- 
caster in the First Voyage (1601). In September, 1609, he was made by Keeling chief 
of the factory there. In August, 1614, he was at home, and petitioning for recom- 
pense for his services, but his application was met with charges of having enriched 
himself to the value of S,oool. or io,oooJ. to the Company's prejudice ; in the follow- 
ing month, however, he was admitted a freeman gratis, " for long service." Three 
years later (Dec., 1617), he entered into an agreement with the Company to serve 
them for a further period of five years, and proceeded to Bantam accordingly, to 
resume his old post as head of the factory. In 1621 his employers were much exer- 
cised by reports of corruption and private trade among their servants there, Spalding 
being especially mentioned, as being by the common voice worth 20,000. He left 
Bantam on his homeward voyage i^th Dec., 1623, in the Royal Exchange. The Com- 



9 6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

THE HECTOR. 

Hector. Her price by appraysm* ... 1416" oo s oo d 

Her repaier & chardgf of 

setting forth. 3000 oo oo 

Her victualls 1726 oo oo 

Imprest to men 322 oo oo 

6464 oo oo 

THE PYNNACE 

pynnace. A Pinnace of I2o Tunns & all 

her chardges of setting 
forth w th victualls & 

ymprestf 26oo li oo 3 oo d 

Soma totalis 22913" i6 s oo 

THE MARCHANDIZE the 1 be bought and sent 

in theis Shipps. 
Leade. Leade for 150 ffother at io n 

p ffother 1500 oo oo 

i^n. Iron for 150 Tonns Eng : & 

Spann: att I2 U p Tunn ... 1800 oo oo 
T y nn - Tynn in small barrs 5 Tunns 

at 72" p Tunn 0360 oo oo 

Clothes. 

ciothes. 30 venice Readf att I2 11 ... 36o H oo 5 oo d 

20 stamellf 2 at ... 20 ... 400 oo oo 

10 popingey greenes 3 at 12 ... 120 oo oo 

pany determined to enter an action against him for private trading (1624), but finally 
the matter was compromised by his payment of a fine of iooo/., subsequently reduced 
to goo/. This is the last we hear of him. 
1 A mistake for "to." 

8 Stammel, from the French estamel, a kind of common woollen stuff, dyed red. 
" Red-hood, the first that doth appear 
In Stammel. Scarlet is too dear." 

(Ben Jonson's Love's Welcome.) 

8 Popinjays were gay coloured woollen stuffs, for which Gloucester was once 
famous, and they were so called after the common green and red parrot, the pappagallo, 
i,e. "talking cock," of the Italians, and papegai of the French ; who thus made the. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 97 

5yellowesatt n ... 055 oo oo 
5 flame Coullo r8 ats Gallaunt^ 1 

at i5 u 075 oo oo 

2 blackball 2O U ... 040 oo oo 

5 violett? grayne at i8 u ... 090 oo oo 

5 Murreys graine 2 at 1 8 U ... 090 oo oo 

5 blewes att 15" 075 oo oo 

5 plunckette 3 att I2 U 060 oo oo 

5 ffrench greenes att I2 U ... 060 oo oo 

5 grasse greenes att I2 U ... 060 oo oo 

5 Azars 4 att I2 U 060 oo oo 

107 clothes 1545 oo oo 



Devonshire kersies 

Deuonshires kersics. 2Q stamettC 3 att 4 U . . . ... 8o U 

10 Violettf graine at 4 U ... 40 

30 venice Redd? 

10 popingey greenes . . . I 5o s__ I5o ii 

10 flame Coullo" 

10 grasse greenes 

10 gallauntf ... \ 

loyallowes I u 

4 black? 

6 blewes J 

120 kersies 0345 oo oo 

final syllable of its name refer to its gay plumage; and the same significance is 
retained in the English form of "popinjay," "jay "being the same word as "gay," 
as in "jay," i.e. " the gay (plumaged) bird." 

1 Gala ribbons or scarfs. 

2 Mulberry-coloured stuffs. 

3 A sort of woollen stuff, generally coloured sky-blue (and hence called also 
"celestines"), but sometimes crimson, for which Wiltshire, Gloucestershire, and 
Somersetshire were once noted. The word seems connected with "blanket." 

4 Another variety of blue-coloured cloth once manufactured in the same three 
counties. 

5 A slight -textured woollen stuff resembling linsey-woolsey. 

H 



Hams: kersies. Tn 

loWachette - - 74 oo oo 



g8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Keighleys narrow listes of the best sortes. 

15 Venice Reddf 
10 popingeygreenes 

15 flame Collo 1 ' 3 

70 peecf at 53 J 9 P peece oi8s l1 o6 3 oS' 1 . 1 
10 grasse greenes 

10 yellowes 
10 Watchettf 2 

North : dozens. [10] Northcren Doozons Read? att^i 

4 U 5 8 P peece 

"k 

}- - 

2Q peeC Sayes 3 of dyvers Collo 18 att 52 s 0052 oo oo 
ironwork* Head peece, white, grauen, & gilded-> OI(X) l6 og 

w th some few shirtf of male 
Somma totalis of all the m r chandize 6ooi u i6 3 8 d 

A Veiw of the chardge of this third voyadge. 

STOCKE remayneing in the East Indies ... 3OOO U oo oo 

The Dragon setting forth ............ 10849 1600 

The Hecto r setting forth ............ 6464 oo oo 

The Pinnace setting forth ............ 2600 oo oo 

Soma totalis ... 22913 16 oo 
Marchandize out wardes will coste ...... 600 i u 16 8 

The some of the whole chardge \ 2 8qii li 12 s 8 d 
outwardf J " 

A Computacon of theis shipps reladeinge homeward^. 
Dragons ladmge. pQR THE Dragon ouer and aboue^j 
6500 sackes of pepp and 460 bahars 
of Cloues w ch is esteemed the goodf J* 2400O r 
in that Countrie will puide 4000 I 
sackf of pepp at 6 r p sack 

1 There are discrepancies here, probably due to errors in copying from the 
original estimate ; and there is also some mistake in the total. 

2 A blue-coloured woollen stuff, for which Watchet, in Somersetshire, was at this 
time famous. 

3 A thin-textured woollen stuff, resembling the light serges of to-day. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



00 



Hector 



FOR THE Hecto* to be laden att the 
Molloccos w th pepp Nuttf . Cloues 
& mace will coste 



40OOO 1 ' 



Pynnace. 



The totall reduced to 
4OOO0 1 ' by abatemt 
of some particulers. 



THE LADINGS of the Pinnace att 
the Molluccos w th pepp, Nuttf : 
Cloues & mace .. 



12000 



ch 



THE ladeinge of theis 3 shipps \ 

ouer & aboue the goodf in the I 76000 w cu is 

Countrie will cost in Royalls Fstarlinge 17100" 

of 8, rated att 4^5 p Royall j 
The totall some of the chardge 

outwardf 28915" 12 s o8 d 

And of the ladeinge homeward^ [17100" oo oo] 
Soma totalis outwardf & home- ") 

wardf } 46oi5" 12 s oS< 

Besidf mens wagf att the 

retourne of theis ships 



IOOOO 11 OO 00 



THE w ch Computacon being 
reueiwed is reduced from 
46015" 12 s 08 to aboute 



40000" oo oo 



w 



THE 1 pportion of victuals for the 2 shipps & the Pinnace, 
th 280 men, & by whome the same is to be puided freelie 



Breade 1260 weight 
Meale 0179^ 
Beanes 0196 Bushells 
Pease 0392 Bushells 
Gate meale 0263 Bushells 
Steale 2 Wheate 0263 Bushells 



puided by m r 



'Nicholas Lynge 



Reynold Greene 



1 Entered also on the Court Minutes for roth February, 1606/7. 

Mr. Rundall, who, in his Voyages towards the North-West (Hakluyt Society, 1849), 
has printed the table given on page 102, queries " French grain ? " as an explanation 
of this phrase. But, although it is known that the wheat carried out in the early 
voyages came almost exclusively from France, this fact gives no clue to the meaning 
of the word "steale." It is probably derived from the " steely nes and hardnes" 

H I 



100 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



Sider onoj Tunn 

Proines french or damaske oio c 
Rasonns of the sonne ... 7^ 

Currant? io c 

Ginger oj c 

Nutmeggf ... ooo I2 U 

Poulder sugar ... ... 002 

.. o I2 1 



Cake sope lepo . . . 

Lemon water 1 

Beames scales & weightes 
&c: as appeth by the 
Register 2 the 3 of De- 
cember 1606. 



. puided by m r Robert Johnson 



Shipp beare 060 Tunns 
Stronge beare 2oi Tunn 



brewed by m 1 
Courte 



Campion by order of 



Wyne 



0090 pipes puided by m 1 



Rich Humble 
Withn Harrison 



Beaffe drie salted 224^ weight } f Nich is Leate. 

Beaffe pickled 0429 weight I provided by mM Hump: Smyth 
Porke pickled o6oo c weight J [ ffrancis Taylo r 

(Court Minutes, i^th May, 1619) which was supposed to be the peculiar property of 
the foreign-grown commodity, and to make it therefore more suitable for the manu- 
facture of biscuits for long voyages. It is interesting to note that, at the date already 
quoted, the Company's purveyor declared this belief in the superiority of French 
corn to be unfounded, and thenceforward its importation for this purpose appears to 
have been abandoned. 

1 We may trace in this item the hand of Sir James Lancaster, who was one of the 
first to use the juice of lemons as an antidote to scurvy, and by this precaution kept 
his men in good health, in striking contrast to the crews of the other vessels of his 
squadron, who were so reduced by disease that, on reaching Table Bay on the out- 
ward voyage, he was obliged to send men on board to assist in taking down their 
sails. It is worthy of notice that this use of sour juices as an antiscorbutic was not 
formally adopted by the Admiralty until 1795, nearly two centuries after its value 
had been pointed out by Albertus, and its practical efficacy demonstrated by Sir 
Richard Hawkins and Captain Lancaster. 

9 i.e. the Court Minutes (now lost). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



Cheese 
Butter 
Stockfish . . 
Backalew 2 . . 
Lynge 
Musterdseed 
Bey salt 
White salt ... 

Vinagre 
Aquavitae . . . 
Rape Oyle . . 
Honnie 
wax Candles 



009 weyes 1 
0039 ffirkins 

35 C 
0208 great c 



on Bushells 
012 h heed? 
003 h heed? 

on Tunns 
0280 gallons 

07^ h heed? 

006 barrells 
028o H 



'lohn Highlord 



-puided by m r - 



Robert 



Tallowe Candles 400^ 



provided by m 1 



Renington 3 
George Bennett 



Edmond Scott. 



Canves for sayles Anco rs & to ) r f Wiftm Greenwell 4 

,, v provided by mM TTT .,, TT 

see the sayles cutt out J r [Wiftm Harrison. 5 

All Caske & Iron hoopes for 
the wyne onelie excepted 
viz water Caske 0780 Tuns 
Baricos 6 0780 



/"Robert Middleton 



provided by m r 



Sweete Oyle 
Rice 



1 120 gallons 
i weight 



7 1 pvided 



by m 1 



(.Richard Pearce 

(Robert Coxe. 
(Tho: Westwray. 



As appeareth more att lardge by the Register the 13 of 
October & the 27 of lanuarie 1606. Aswell for pvision of Iron 
leade heedpeec?, Clothes, Kersies 8 Gunnerstoare Boateswaines 
stoare Steward? stoare &c: 

1 A somewhat indefinite weight, varying between 2 and 3 cwt. 

2 Cod fish ; from the Spanish bacallao, which again is said to have been derived 
from the native name in Newfoundland and the adjacent mainland. 

3 " Benington " in the Court Minutes. 

4 Deputy Governor from 1604 to 1615, when he retired on the plea of age. He 
died some four or five years later. 

5 One of the original Committees, and Treasurer from 1613 until his death in 
March, 1620. 

6 Barrels or breakers (Spanish barrica). 

1 Three hundred weight and a half is meant (see next page). 

8 A coarse woollen stuff, originally manufactured at Kersey, in Suffolk. 



102 



F/flST LETTER BOOK OF 




- 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 103 

|HE COMPANIE 1 of m r chauntf tradinge [into] the 
East Indies humblie praye that by yo r Hono rs meanes 
his ma tie would be pleased in their favo rs to Cause to 
be written in his highnes name, to sundrie kingf & 
Gou r no ra theis ires followinge Viz. 

1 TO THE greate kinge of Suratt vnto whose Countries we 
haue not traded heretofore but now comeing as m r chauntf & 
ffreindf to traffique & trade pray that o r psons shipps & goodf 
may be well & freindlie vsed And that he would be pleased to 
graunte vs priuiledgf & libtie to traffique quietlie in his dominions 
& to settle a ffactorie theare, yf we desire yt Alsoe to adu r tise, 
that his ma tie hath sent him a present (w ch o r ffacto 1 ' 3 will puide) 
by his servant the bearer hereof but name him not. His stile 

is TO THE MOST PUISSANT PRINCE ACKBARIRBA LEIDG 
ACKBURSHA* KINGE OF SURATT. 

2 TO THE kinge of lava maior who wroote a ire to o r 
kinge and sent him 2 Bezar stones for a present. 3 The receipt 
& thankfull acceptaunce whereof we pray his ma tie to mention 
in his ire, And to thanke him for the kinde vsadge of his 
m r chaunt praying the Continuance of his favo r toward^ vs 
o r ships & goodf in his dominions. Alsoe to adu r tise that o 1 ' 
kinge hath sent him a present (w dl wee will puide) by his ser- 
vaunt the bearer hereof his style is THE HIGHE &- MIGHTIE 
PRINCE PAN GRAM P ATT IE KINGE OF IAUA MAIOR. 

1 " Ytt is furder ordered that Ires be provided by this Companie from his Ma tie , to 
' be sent to the kinge of Cambaia, & the Gou r no r of Aden & to 2 places more not farr 

" from Aden, what titles to geue them is to be inquired of Raphe ffytch. Alsoe Ires 
to be sent as from his ma tie to those kinges as sent him presentes." (Court Minutes, 
3ist Dec., 1606.) On the loth Feb., 1606/7, the letters were ordered to be "lymmed 
" and prepared for his ma ties signiture, and seu r all Coppies to be writt out whereby 
" the same may be translated into Portigues to be sent w th the said Ires; " and on 
the igth "was shewed the Ires of his ma tie to the Princes of the East Indies trans- 
lated into the Portigall languadge, the w ch were ordered to be lymmed and faire 
" engrossed accordinglie by m r Segar fitt for his ma tes signiture." 

2 Mahomed Jalal ud Din Akbar, the third Mogol Emperor of Delhi, born 1542, 
and died on his sixty-third birthday, i5th Oct., 1605. He came to the throne two 
years before Queen Elizabeth, and survived Her Most Glorious Majesty two years. 

3 See page 67. 



io 4 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

3 TO THE kinge of TEDORE who writt to his ma tie a 
lardge tre of Complaint 1 agraynst the Hollanders and Portingalls 
agaynst whome he craved his ma^ ayde : But this being matter 
of State We leaue to his ma tie & yo r hono r Humblie praying that 
his ma tie would be pleased to thanke the said kinge for his former 
good will toward^ vs his m r chaunt, & pray the Continuaunce of 
his fauo r8 and to graunte vs free trade & traffique w tb saffetie & 
good vsadge both of o r psons & goodf his name is RECHILL 
MOLEY KINGE OF TEDORE. 

4 TO THE Gou r no r or Sabander of NERE who sent his 
ma tie a Bahar of Nutmeggf : whereof we pray his ma tie to signifie 
his good acceptaunce & that he hath sent him a present by his 
servant the bearer hereof. To thanke him for the good inter- 
taynem* of vs his m r chauntf att o r last being theare, praying the 
Continuance of his favo r towardes vs in graunting vs free traffique 
& trade w th saffetie & goodf usadge of o r psons & good?. To THE 

RIGHT HONORABLE THE SABANDER OF NERE. 

5 TO THE Sabander of Luntor : Thankeing him for the 
good intertaynment of vs his ma ties m r chaunt att o r last being 
there, & praye the Continuance thereof. And that he would 
graunte vs ffree traffique & trade w th saffetie & good vsadge both 
of o r psons & goodf : and that his ma tie hath sent him a present 
by his servant the bearer hereof: his style is To THE RIGHT 

HONORABLE THE SABANDER OF LUNTOR. 

6 TO THE Gou r no r of Adem That wee his ma^ m'chauntf 
comeing thither as good ffreindf to traffique & trade, pray that 
we may be freindly interteyned & pmitted to traffique w th all 
lifctie & ffreedome w th saffetie & good vsadge both of o r psons 
ships & goodf his ma tie being in league & Amitie w th the GRAND 
SEIGNIOR. 

7 TO THE kinge of Callicout praying that we his ma^ 
m r chauntf comeing thith 1 ' as good freind^ to traffique & trade 
may be freindlie interteyned & pmitted to trade in all libertie & 
ffreedome w th peace, & saffetie of o r psons shipps and goodf . And 

1 See page 67. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 105 

that his ma tie hath sent him a present by his servant the bearer 
hereof. 

8 TO THE kinge of MOLLUCCOS signifieing the receipt of 
that kingf tre to his ma tie w th a present of a bahar of Cloues, 1 & 
thankfull acceptacon thereof : And that his ma tie hath now sent 
him a present by his servant the bearer hereof And furder wee 
humblie pray his ma tie wilbe pleased to intreate the said kf . favo r 
toward^ vs his said m r chaunt. And that forasmuch as the 
soliciting & opposeing of some of the Hollenders theare agaynst 
vs, & o r trade in those ptf appeth euidentlie to be done for their 
owne priuate designes w th out any the Consent or likeing of their 
Superio" the Gou r no r & statf of the lowe Countries w th whome 
his ma tie is in pfect amitie : That kinge would be pleased accord- 
ing to the Teno r of his said tre to his Ma tie freindlie to enter- 
tayne vs & our people w th graunte of free trade & traffique w tb o r 
quiet & saffetie of psons shipps & goodf : & establishm* of a 
ffactorie theare as we shall desire. To THE HIGH AND MIGHTIE 
KINGE OF THE MOLLOCCOS. 



His ma tie to the kinge of Suratt. 

|lGHT high &c: o r subiectf haueing of late yeares vsed 
to trade into diuers Countries of the Princes yo r 
neighbo rs haue amongst them heard of yo 1 ' fame & 
of the wealth of yo r Countries w ch hath moued in 
them a desire to visitt soe greate a Prince, & to craue lifitie of 
Traffique w th his subiectf . In w ch their purpose 
we haue incourraged them to pceede & doe 
recomend them to you vpon this Confidence 
bikncke for'lurFac* that as to vs nothinge is more pleaseing then to 
na r meas a t d h d ey s s u h c ouid heare of the estate & dignitie of Princes, and 
when they come to Customes of Nations farr remote from vs: Soe 
the like pleasure is w th you to heare of o rs 

This is intended for _ f ,. , __ . ^ _ 

caiiicutt." whereof the onelie meanes is the Nauigacon of 

1 See page 68. King James appears to have granted these cloves to Sir Hugh 
Carmichael. (S^ Calendar of State Papers, Domestic, Addenda, 1580-1625, p. 477.) 
Added in a different hand. 




106 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

o r subiectf . Wherefore we assure o r selues you will not make 
difficultie att o r request to graunte vnto o r subiectc such libertie 
of traffique & priuiledgf as shall be resonable both for their 
A copic of each of securitie & pffitt & that they may for the better 
S^rir 68 feSe handling of their trade settle a ffactorie there 
like as we willdoe to yo rs yf att any tyme yt 
Jen e t in sp e a s yni^h r by shall be requested of vs, And in the meane tyme 
wt r h t hf h a a d r d p ic e on[?]n for a token of o r good will & desire to enterteyne 
c!]1o th 4. m rX yo r amitie we haue by this bearer o r servant sent 

lardge [on] fo. 8.i p1l 

vnto you a small present w ch we pray you to 
accept for a begininge of that freindshipp betweene vs w ch we 
hope shall alwayes increase heerew th . dated at o r Pallace of 
Westminster the xxiij th of ffebruarie. i6o6. 2 



FROM HISma tie to Adem : 

JRUSTIE and welbeloued we greete you well. Our 
m r chauntf haueing of late yeares entered into a 
Course of Navigacon & traffique into diu r s pt of 
the East Indies haue lett vs vnderstand that they 
haue a purpose alsoe to frequent those ptf where you haue 
rom his matie: to chardge i And prayed o r Comendacon for them 
Adem - to you w dl we willinglie graunted because we are 

in Amitie w th the mightie howse of Ottoman and doe traffique 
w th him thorough the Mediterranean Seas, as we doubt not but 
yo u doe vnderstand. Wherefore we pray you that o r subiectf 
resorteing into those Countries may traffique w th ffreedome & 
finde saffetie & good vsadge for their psons shipps & goodf : 
& we assure o r selfe that the GRAND SEIGNIOR will allow yo r 
doinge. And for o r ptf we shall be readie to requite yt w th 
any kindnes we may doe to you. dated att o r Pallace of West- 
minster the 23 th daie of ffebruarie. 1606. 



1 This note is added in yet another hand. The references are to pp. 109 and 231 of 
the present volume. 

1606/7, an d s in the following letters. 





THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 107 

FROM HIS ma tie to the Kinge of Tedore. 

|lGHT High &c: Att the retourne of o r m r chaunte 
from their voyadge into yo r Countries we receiued 
atoken from you w ch we tooke very kindelie : And 
vnderstanding by their reporte that they had found 
good vsadge of you and yo r subiectf in their trade, and they 
HIS matie: to the bein g mcourraged thereby to retourne agayne, we 
thought yt ffitt to lett you pceaue by o r tres what 
good reporte they haue made of yo r freindlines towardes them, 
and to praye the Continuance thereof, Soe as they may Con- 
tinue their traffique w th yo r ffavo r , & w th saifetie of their psons 
ships & goodf in such manner as we will doe to any of yo rs 
that haue desire to visitt theis ptf. And yf in any thinge we 
may doe you kindnes, you shall be assured of yt In the meane 
tyme we haue sent you by this bearer o r servant a token of o r 
good will, w dl we desire may eu r increase betweene you & vs. 
Dated att o r Pallace of Westminster the 23 th of ffebruarie. 1606. 



FROM HIS ma tie to Nere 

[TT THE retourne of o r m r chauntf from their trade in 
that Countrie we receiued from you a Bahar of Nut- 
meggf for a token of o rl good will w ch we accepted 
w th all kindnes, And we vnderstoode by them howe 
freindlie they had been intertayned by you in their tramque, 
His mac : to y e w h nat h incourraged them to attempt it agayne 

SabanderofNere. & ys tQ recomenc j t h em VntO yO r ffaVO r and 

pteccon Soe as they may be suffered quietlie to continue their 
said tradf w th saffetie & good vsadge of their psons, shipps, & 
goodf. And we shall be redie to requite y*, w th any kindnes to 
yo u or yo rs , And in the meane tyme haue sent you by this bearer 
o r servant a token of o r good will w ch we desire may eu r increase 
betweene you & vs. ffrom o r Pallace at Westminster the 23 th of 
ffebr : 1606. 

1 This should evidently be " yo 1 '." 





io8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

FROM HIS ma tie to Luntor. 

ITT THE retourne of o r m r chauntf from their trade in 
that Countrie we vnderstande by them how freindlie 
they had beene interteyned by yo u in their traffique 
w ch hath incourraged them to attempt yt agayne, and 
vs to recomend them to yo r ffavo r and pteccon. Soe as they 
the ma y be suffered quietlie to Continue their said 
Luntor. trades w th saffetie and good vsadge of their 
psons shipps and goodf. And we shall be redie to requite yt 
w th any kindnes to you or yo rs : and in the meane tyme haue 
sent you by this bearer o r servant a token of o r good will w ch we 
desire may euer encrease betweene you & vs. Dated att o r 
Pallace of Westmin the 23 th of ffebruarie 1606. 



HIS HIGHNES to the Kinge of lava Maior. 




high &c: att the retourne of o r subiectf from 
their last voyadge into yo r Countries we rec d from 
you both a ire of great kindnes & twoe Bezar stones 
both w ch we tooke verie kindlie as a testimony of 
yo r [desire] 1 to enterteyne Amitie w th vs. Especiallie we were 
His highnes to the Phased [to vn]Merstand by their reporte how 
Kinge of iaua Maior. ki n dii e they were vsed in yo r Coufntrie] 1 in 
matters concerning their traffique w ch hath incouraged thfem] 1 
to pceede in yt. And vs to recomend them to you & yo r 
pteccon agaynst any that would oppose agaynst them, or 
molest them in their said tradf in as ample measure as 
we would be willinge to doe to any of yo rs . yf their desires 
shall be to visitt o r Countries. To testifie vnto you o r kinde 
acceptaunce of yo r favo r shewed them & o r desire to continue 
Amitie w th you. We haue sent by this bearer o r servant 
atoken of o r loue w ch we hope shall alwaies continue & encrease 
betweene vs. Dated att o r Pallace of Westmin the 23 th of 
ffebruarie 1606. 

1 The manuscript has here been torn away. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 109 

HIS MA TO THE KINGE OF THE MOLLOCCOS. 

|AMES BY the grace of God kinge of greate Brittaine 
ffraunce and Ireland defendo 1 of the faith &c : To the 
mightie kinge of the Molloccos & of the teritories & 
dominions adioyneing. ^ Att the retourne of o r subiectf 
from their last voyadge in yo r Countries we receiued from you a 
^ e of S reate kmdnes & a Bahar of Cloues, w ch we 
tooke very kindlie as a testimony of your desire 
to enterteyne Amitie w th vs, but especiallie wee 
weare pleased to vnderstand of yo r kindnes to- 
as f U wardf them in matters conc r ning their trade & 
ti? e w S5 traffique w th you, w ch hath incouraged them to 
SfSS pceede in yt, & vs to recomend them to you & 
y h oa se a present yet Tor jo 1 ' pteccon agaynst any that would oppose 
Sosribe t c w ome h t e o r agaynst them, or molest them in their trade in 
thought gSdToSt as ample manner as we would be willing to doe 
fres a & ai wt e h w a h ne'w to any of yo rs , yf their desire shall be to visitt o r 
^nSt'and th e a t y the Countries. And whereas we vnderstand that 

contentes of or formr TT 11 J l_ fc. fh i 

ires were to this pur- some Hollenders whoe tramque w th you doe 
oppose them selues agaynst o r Subiectf w th euill 
speeches & other practizes to hinder their trade Although we 
doubt not but y* in yo r owne ludgement you can easilie conceiue 
that nV'chaunt^ not onelie of diuers N aeons, but of one & the 
same nation will ofte tymes Calumniate each others for diuers 
respectf, & hinder what they cann those that happen into the 
saime trade w th3 the 3 vse : yet haue we thought good to assure 
yo u soe much by o r ire, that their Superio rs & Gou r no r9 will dis- 
allowe them in that practise being w th vs in verie good Amitie. 
Wherefore we doubt not but you will graunte vnto o r subiectf 
ffreedome of quiet tramque w th you w th saffetie for their psons, 
ships, & goodf , & libertie to establish a ffactorie theare, (yf they 
sha'll desire yt) according to yo r princelie Offer in yo r said ire. 
And in the meane tyme for atoken of o r good will & desire to 
enterteyne yo r Princelie Amitie we haue by this bearer o r servant 

1 Marginal note in a different hand. The " addition " seems to have been inserted 
in the place indicated by the caret. On this subject see page 231. 
2 \y<* ? 3 They. 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 




sent you a small present w ch we pray you to accept. Wherew^ 
we Comend yo r ma tie to the tuition of the most high God. Dated 
att o r Pallace of Westminster the 23 th of ffebruarie 1606. 



THE IUDGE l of the Admiralties warrant to app r hend such 
of the shipps Company as shall absent themselues. 

|HEARAS diuers of the Companie hired for the East 
India voyadge absent them selues from the shipps, & 
some of them endevo 1 ' to shifte themselues away to 
the hindraunce of the voyadge now readie to sett 
sayle & the m r chaunt interessed therein. Theis are to will & 
requier you that you apprehend or cause to be app r hended 
all & eu r y such disordered psons, as shall any way Offend 
conc r ning the p r misses, that he or they may be deliu r ed on 
shippbourde to their Comaunders theare to remayne, & to 
be pceeded w th according to the quallitie of his or their offence. 
Whereof fayle you not as you will aunsweare the Contrarie att 
yo r pill, ffrom my howse neere the Docto rs Commons the 
i6 th of March, 1606. 

Your loueing freind 

Tho Crompton. 

To m r Wiftm Pope Marshall of 
the Admiraltie or in his absence to 
the Generall of the East India 
Companies shipps, & all other 
Officers of the Admiraltie, & other 
his ma tics subiectf 

1 " Whearas we haue hired diuers sailo rs to goe in o r voyadge now intended for 
" the East Indies, whoe haue not onelie subscribed to o r Bookes, to performe the 
" same, but alsoe haue receiued wages of vs, & some ymprest moneys: & yet we 
" may doubt (as in former tyme hath beene vsed) that aswell before the shipps were 
" readie to departe as att their departure some of such a nomber may be missinge not 
" onelie w th o r losse, but alsoe tendinge to the ou r throwe of the wholle voyadge. Yt 
" is thought ffitt for prevencon hereof, That Warrant may be procured from the Judge 
"of the Admiraltie, or yf need be from the Lo: Admirall for app r hencon and 
" ponnishm* of such as are or shall goe away or departe & absent them selues from 
" their places and service in this pnte voyadge after they shalbe hired & agreed 
" w th all." (Court Minutes, 23rd Jan., 1606/7.) See also page 267. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. in 

[AMES 1 BY the grace of God kinge of England 
Scotland ffraunce and Ireland defendo 1 ' of the faith 
&c: To o r trustie & welbeloued Wiftm Kealinge 
& Wittm Hawkins 2 greeteing. Whereas diuers of 
o r loueing subiectf att their owne Aduentures costf & chardgf 
aswell for the Hono 1 ' of this o r Realme of 

A Commission from ,, r1 01 *r 

ms matie: tom-W'u England as for the encrease & advancenr ot 

Kealinge and mr Wa " , - 

Hawkins trade of nVchandize w th m the same haue for- 

februarie. 1606. 

merlie sett forth 2 voyages to the East Indies 
w th c r teyne shipps & Pinnaces by way of marchandizeing by 
w ch ships & Pinnaces they haueing discou r ed & begon to settle 
atrade in some pte of the said East Indies & their shipps 
being retourned from thence laden w th sundrie m r chandize 
brought frome those ptf they the said m r chaunt intending 
to frequent those Countries of the East Indies by Continueing 
the trade alredie discou r ed & begoon, and endeu r ing furder dis- 
cou r y of trade of those ptf for the more ample vent of the 
Natiue Comodities of o r kingdomes, & retourning from the 
places of their discou r y such necessarie Comodities as shall be 
of spetiall vse & benefitt, both to vs and o r subiectf, are in 
hand to prepare & make readie their said shipps latelie re- 
tourned from the East Indies & to sett them forth agayne on 
a new voyadge. And whereas the said m r chaunt haue chosen 
you the said Wittm Kealeinge to be principall Gou r nor or 

1 The Royal Commission for the Third Voyage (1607-1609). There is a minute of 
this Commission in the Public Record Office, under date 3rd March, 1607. (See CaL 
E. I. State Papers, 1513-1616, p. 150.) 

2 William Hawkins, the lieutenant-general of this voyage, on reaching Surat 
proceeded as directed (see p. 124) to the court of the Great Mogul, where he arrived 
in April, 1609. He was received with great favour, and succeeded, in spite of Portu- 
guese intrigues, in obtaining a license for the establishment of an English factory 
at Surat. The emperor gave him a handsome allowance, and married him to the 
daughter of an Armenian Christian. Later, however, his favour declined, and 
Hawkins applied for permission to depart. He reached Surat in Feb., 1612, and 
there found Sir Henry Middleton with the ships of the Sixth Voyage. He accom- 
panied Sir Henry to the Red Sea, and afterwards to Bantam, whence he took ship 
for England in the Thomas, but died on the passage home (1613). His widow after- 
wards married Gabriel Towerson (see p. 33). 

An attempt has been made to connect this William Hawkins with the nephew of 
Sir John Hawkins who was lieutenant-general of Fenton's abortive voyage in 1582-3, 
but it is extremely doubtful whether the identity can be established. 



ii2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

General! of all the m r chauntf Marriners and other o r subiectf 
w ch are or shall "be shipped in any of the said shipps. And 
you the said Wiftm Hawkins to be leiuetenante generall of all 
the nVchauntf Marriners & other o r subiectf, w ch are or shall 
be shipped in any of the said shipps. We graciouslie favoringe 
their intended voyadge & approueing & alloweing of their choyse 
of you to the same Gou r nm te , being desirous to furnish you w th 
all fitt & Convenient power and aucthoritie to rule & gou r ne all 
& eu r y o r subiectf ymployed in this voyadge, by a due obedience 
to be by them yealded vnto you in the obserueing and execute- 
ing of all such good orders & Constitucons as you shall thinke 
Conuenient, to ordaine & appointe for the furtheraunce of the 
said voyadge to the Hono r of vs & o r kingdomes & for the 
advauncem* of the said trade doe hereby straightlie chardge & 
Comaund all & eu r y pson & psons ymployed vsed or shipped 
in this voyadge in any of the said shipps to giue all due obedi- 
ence & respect vnto you duringe the said voyadge, & to 
beare them selues one toward^ an other, in all good order & 
quietnes for avoydinge any occasion that might breed Muteny 
quarrells or discension amongst them to the hindrance of the 
good successe, w ch is to be hoped for by godf puidence of the 
said intended voyadge, and in default of such dutie & obedience 
to be pformed toward^ you, & for the Correccon & quenchinge 
of all such Muteny quarrells or dissention that shall or may be 
moued by the disorder euill dispoticon, or pversnes of any of 
the said psons. Wee doe hereby authorize you the said Wiftm 
Keelinge during the said voyadge, or during soe longe tyme as 
you shall lyue in the said voyadge to Chastice correct & ponnish 
all offenders & transgresso 1 ' 3 in that behalfe according to the 
qualitie of their Offences w th such punishm^ as are comonlie 
vsed in all Armyes by Sea, when they are not capitall. And 
for Capitall Offences as for wilfull murther w ch is hatefull in 
the sight of God, or mutenie w ch is one offence that may tend 
to the ou r throw of the said voyadge the same being trulie and 
iustlie proued agaynst any of the pson or psons aforesaid. We 
doe hereby giue vnto you the said Wiftm Kealeing during all 
the tyme of the said voyadg or during soe longe tyme as you 
shall Hue in the same, full power & aucthoritie to vse & putt 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 113 

in Execution o r lawe called Marshall lawe in that behalfe. And 
in case of yo r decease (w ch god forbidd) we doe then likewyse 
hereby aucthorize you the said Wiftm Hawkins to execute the 
power & aucthoritie by this o r Comission graunted to the said 
Wiftm Keeleing in as ample manner as is herein before expressed, 
& in such sorte as the said Wiftm Kealeing did or might doe by 
vertue hereof. And theis O T Ires shall be vnto you, and either 
of you sufficient warrant & discharge, for the doing & executeing 
of all and singuler the p r misses. And for as much as att this 
present tyme we are in ametie w th all Christian Princes, & are 
vnwilling that any our subiectf should giue occasion of breach 
or hindraunce of that league or ametie w ch we hold w th any o r 
Confederate ffreindf or Allyes. And because we are not ignorante 
of the emulacon & envie that doth accompany the discou r y of 
Countries & tradf & of the quarrells & Contencons w ch doe many 
tymes fall out betweene the subiectf of diuers Princes that meete 
the one w th the other in forreine & farr remote Countries, in the 
Course & psecuteing of their discou r ies, and being desirous that 
o r subiectf should forbeare to moue or beginn any quarrell or 
contencon vpon the subiect of o* Confederate ffreindf or Alleys 

either in their pceeding, or retourne vpon or from 
^g mgp any of their voyage Wee therefore doe hereby 

straightly chardge & Comaund you the said Wiftm 
Keeling & you the said Wiftm Hawkins & all other 
vnder yo r Gou r nm te , that neither in yo 1 ' voyadge outward or 
homeward or in any Countrie, Hand, Porte or place where 
you shall abide, or come duringe the tyme of yo r being 
abroade out of o r kingdomes or dominions where you meete 
w th any the Subiecte of the kinge of Spaine, or of any other 
o r Confederate ffreindf or Alleys, or any other Nacon or people, 
their shipps, vessells good or m r chandize, you doe not attempt 
or goe aboute to sett vpon, take or surprise their psons shipps 
vessells goodf or m r chandizes, or offer any iniurie, or discourtesie 
vnto them vnlesse you shall first by them, therevnto iustlie be 
puoked, or driuen in the iust defence of yo r owne psons, yo r 
shipps, vessells, goodf or m r chandizes, or for recompence or 
recou r y of any the psons goodf or m r chandizes of any o r sub- 
iectf that are alredie in or neere the East Indies as you will 

I 



U 4 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

aunsweare the Contrarie att yo r vttermost prills. Witnes O T 
selfe at Westminster the 14 th day of ffebruary in the fourth 
yeare of o r Reigne of England ffraunce & Ireland & of Scotland 
the 40 th . 1 

Copia 
p fcre de priuato sigillo. 



IN THE NAME OF GOD. AMEN. 

THE Q TH DAY OF MARCH. 1606. 

A Comission sett downe by vs the Gou r no r , 
Deputie, & Comicties of the m r chauntf of London 
trading to the East Indies for better direccon of o r 
loueing ffreindf the Generall Leiuetenaunte, and others 
the Captaines, m r chaunt, m rs & Marriners in this our 
intended voyadge to the East Indies, w ch we humblie 
beseech Almightie God to blesse w th a happie Con- 
clusion. 




wheareas we they m r chaunt aforesaid w th 
a greate chardge & trouble haue prepared twoe 
shipps & a Pynnace viz the Read Dragon of 700 
Tonns Anthonie Hippon 3 m r , the Hector of 500 
Tonns Mathew Mollineux 4 m r , & the Consent of 115 Tonns 
Edmond Bonham m r , for a voyadge by Godf grace by them to 
be made to theast Indies, & haue furnished the same sufficientlie, 

1 1607. 

2 " M r Gou r no r , m r Eldred & m r Hamersley weare intreated w th such as m r 
" Gou r no r shall be pleased to call to Consider & drawe a Commission for eu r y of the 
" shipps, what shall be ffitt and necessarie in this respect & in the meane season, yt 
" is requiered, That each of the Company conceiueing any notes or remembrances, fitt 
" to be added to the said Comission or Comissions, or for advice in the said voyadge 
" doe giue knowledge thereof to m r Gou r no r in writinge, for better and more speedie 
" effectinge of this busines." (Court Minutes, 27th Jan., 1606/7.) 

* Subsequently commanded the Globe in the Seventh Voyage (1611), in the course of 
which he died at sea, gth July, 1612. 

4 Brought home the Dragon in the Third Voyage, and was thereupon engaged 
for the Sixth Voyage. He was at first named master of the Trades Increase, but 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 115 

& in plentiful! manner w th men tackle victualls & all other 
needfull puisions fitt for such a voyadge. Of a spetiall trust & 
Confidence w ch we had in the integritie & iust carriadge of o r 
loueing freind m r Wiftm Kealinge, we doe appointe & aucthorize 
him Gen r all to goe in the Read Dragon & to Comaund o r said 
shipps, and all the men in them, haueing pcured him sufficient 
aucthoritie from our sou r eigne Lord the kingf ma tie for that 
purpose : not doubting but that he will soe behaue himselfe, as 
he may be both feared & loued, & that he will w th all his diligence 
& endevo" psecute o r designes, and labo 1 ' to bringe this our costlie 
voyadge to a happie end. 

2 ITEM we appointe & ordeyne our loueing freindf 
Wiftm Hawkins to be leiuetenante of the shipps & men to take 
passadge in the Hecto r & David Middleton 1 Captaine in the 
Consent, All w ch Comaunders ffacto 1 ' 3 m rs & Marriners we trust 
will soe carrie them selues w th such due respect one to another, 
& obedience to eu r y one of their Superio rs , as loue & kindnes 

Giles Thornton seems subsequently to have been preferred to that position, and 
Molyneux was appointed pilot-major of the fleet. He came home with Downton in 
the Peppercorn in 1613, and is specially mentioned by the latter as his "diligent 
helper." In the following year, he went out again as master of the Merchants' Hope in 
the Second Joint Stock Voyage under Downton. 

1 Brother to Sir Henry Middleton, and also to the John Middleton who com- 
manded the Hector in the First Voyage. David Middleton took part in the Second 
Voyage, and upon his return, was placed in command of the Consent for the Third 
Voyage (1607). He early lost company with the other two vessels of the fleet, and 
was forced to proceed on his course alone. The voyage was however a successful 
one, and Middleton returned early in 1609 with fifty tons of cloves. He was at once 
given the charge of the Expedition (Fifth Voyage), and, in spite of the opposition of 
the Dutch, succeeded in obtaining a cargo at the Moluccas, reaching England again 
in 1611. In a letter from Bantam in 1613 (0. C. 106) reference is made to "Cap* 
"Dauid Midleton his disgrace done him by the kinge, queene, Lord and lady 
" admirall by Complaintes made on him by an audatious Cooke," but nothing further 
on the subject can be traced. In 1614 he was selected as commander of the voyage then 
under preparation, and on the I3th Feb., 1615, his fleet, consisting of the Samaritan, 
Thomas and Thomasine, reached Bantam in safety. Notes occur from time to time of 
his movements during the next seven months or so, and then he disappears altogether 
from view. In Sept., 1617, the Court refused to pay anything to his widow, who 
had married again, until they had ascertained for certain whether Middleton was 
alive or dead; but later on, her second husband having obtained two orders and a 
decree of Chancery, the money was paid him on his giving security both against 
Middleton himself and Middleton's son. 

I I 



n6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

be Continued on all sidf, & all whollie applie their wittf & 
endevo rs for the due pformaunce of this voyadge. 

3 ITEM & for that religious Gouernm* & exercyse doth 
best bynde men to pforme their duties, yt is principallie to be 
cared for that prayers be said Morneing & euening in eu r y shipp 
& the whole Companie called there vnto, w th diligent Eies that 
none be wantinge, that all ioynctlie may w th reuerence & humilitie 
pray vnto almightie God to blesse & p r serue them from all 
daungers in this longe & tedious voyadge. 

4 ITEM that noe blaspheameinge of God, swearing, theft 
dronkennes or otherlike disorders be vsed, but that the same 
be sevearelie ponished, & that noe diceing or other vnlawfull 
games be admitted for that most comonlie, the same is the 
begining of quarrellinge, & many tymes murther a iust occasion 
of God wrath and vengeance from w ch the Lord deliuer vs all. 
Therefore yt shall be needfull that such orders be sett vpp and 
published in eu r y shipp & such ponnishm* appointed for such 
offences as may giue notice to eu r y man, what he ought to 
avoied. 

5 ITEM that spetiall order be geuen, that noe liquor be 
spilt in the ballast of the shipps or filthines be left w tll in bourde 
w ch in heate breedeth Noysome smells, & infeccon, but that there 
be a diligent care to keepe the ou'lopps 1 & other places of the 
shipps cleane & sweete, w ch is a notable preservacon of health, 
wherein the dutchmen doe farr exceede vs in Cleanelines to 
their greate Comendacons & disgrace to o r People. 

6 ITEM that Continuall & true lournalls be kept of eu r y 
daies course & Nauigacon during the wholle voyadge w th a true 
relacon of eu r y thinge that passeth, & this not onelie to be 
done by the seu r all Captaines, m rs Pylottf & m rs matf, but 
alsoe by the m r chaunt & Pursars : and that some of the Prin- 
cipalls in each shipp, may conferre together att convenient tymes, 
when the Generall shall call them theare vnto, to thend that 
yf any haue forgotten, what an other obserued the same may 
be added, soe as a pfect discourse may be sett downe to be 

1 The lowest deck of a ship, consisting of a platform laid over the beams in the 
hold, (Smyth's Sailor's Word Book.) 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 1*7 

presented to the Gou r no r & Companie, when god shall graunt 
them a saffe retourne, to be kept for better direccon of posteritie. 

7 ITEM that the Generall & m r of his shipp, doe sett 
downe and deliu r such instructions to the Comaunders in the 
other shipps that they may all keepe Company together for the 
better releife & Comforte one of another: And yf seperacon of 
them should happen by Constrainte of Tempest that they should 
agree vpon a course before hand, & of a place, whither to applie 
their selues to finde the rest. 

8 ITEM that the Generall, & m r of his shipp, take due 
notice of the seu r all pvisions deliu r ed to eu r y shipp, & to settle 
the same in the chardge of the Officers, appointed for that 
purpose in each shipp, & that the same be entred in the Pursars 
Booke vnderwritten by the said Officers, to thend that such 
thingf as are puided for their needfull supplies may not be 
ymbeselled, & that nothinge thereof be ymployed for any vse 
whatsoeu r , w tll out a Warrant vnder the hand of the Generall 
directed to the Officer that hath such Chardge, w ch warrant 
shall serue for his dischardge in his accompte, otherwyse to be 
aunswearable for the same w th his wage : eu r y such warrant to 
be registred in the Pursars booke, the day of the monneth, & 
the occasion, & this vpon forfecture of soe much out of the 
Pursars wage, This order to be obserued alsoe in eu r y of the 
shipps by the Comaunders, m rs , Pursars & Officers as aforesaid. 

9 ITEM we Comend vnto you the Gen r all principallie, & to 
the rest of the Comaunders & mrs an espetiall care, that at eu r y 
place where you shall water, & refresh yo r men you call the 
Companies together, geauing them seveare warninge to behaue 
themselues peaceablie & Ciuillie, toward^ the people of that place 
(yf any be theare) the better to pcure their ffreindshipp, toward^ 
the supplie of yo r wante, & the like in eu r y place wheare you 
come, least the losse of yo r lyues & ou r throwe of o r voyadge 
pay for yo r disorders, beside an vtter discreeditt to o r Nation, & 
that yo r men doe vse, a discreete meanes in eateing of fruitf, or 
fresh victuals least they surfitt & ffall into diseases, whereof we 
haue had too much experience. And the better to refraine 
vnrulie appetite wee hold yt Convenient, that the Gen r all 
appointe some of the discreetest in the Companies, to pcure & 



n8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

puide in such places, what you want, & the same being brought 
to the Gen r all, by him to be reparted to eu r y Companie, what 
may be needfull, & that none p r sume to doe the Contrarie 
w th out seveare ponishment. And that a spetiall care be had, to 
releeue the sicke w th such fresh meatf & other Comfortable thingf, 
wherew th we haue furnished each shipp for that purpose, & not 
other wyse to be spent in Royott & banquetting & soe the sicke 
pishe for wante of thinges needfull. 

10 ITEM for the ffittest place of reffreshinge, we wysh you 
to shape your Course to the Porte of St. Augustine in the Hand 
of St. Lawrence l where you shall finde good harbo r & plentie of 
victualls : in w ch place yt will not be ffitt to make longe aboade, 
but make hast & endevo r to be vpon the Coaste of Melynde in the 
monneth of lulie att the furdes[t] but for yo r better direccon 
therein, we referr you to the instruccon [s] of S r lames Lancaster 
now deliu r ed you herew th , 2 who can best direct you, for yo r Course 
vpon that Coaste by his owne experience except you in yo r 
discrecons finde otherwyse more fitt : Still standing vpon yo r guard 
in euerie place, w th out yealding any trust to those people. 

11 ITEM after yo r depture frome the Porte of S* Augustine 
toward^* the Coaste of Melinde, beware of the fflattc of Ivdea 3 w cb 
lie betweene the Hand of St Lawrence & the firme land: vpon w ch 
fflattc yt is said the Currant doth sett. There is alsoe an Hand 



1 Madagascar. 2 See p. 136. 

3 "The i of August we passed the flats called os Baixos de ludea, that is, the 
" Flats of the lewes, which are distant from the cape das Corentes 30 miles, and lie 
" between the Hand of S. Laurence, and the firme land, that is from the Hand fiftie 
" miles, and from the firme land seauenty miles, which Flats begin vnder 2.2 degrees 
" and a halfe, and continue to twentie one degrees; there is great care to bee taken 
" lest men fall vpon them, for they are very dangerous, and many ships haue bin lost 
" there, and of late in Anno 1585 a ship comming from Portingak called S. lago beeing 
" Admirall of the Fleet." (Linschoten' s Voyages, Book I., ch. 3.) Commander Taylor, 
in his Sailing Directory (revised edition, 1891), identifies these rocks with " Bassas da, 
" India, often called formerly Europa Rocks," a dangerous reef " 7 or 8 m. in diameter, 
"between lats. 21 26' and 21 32' S., and Ions. 39 41' and 39 32' E." He adds: 
" this danger was named by the Portuguese discoverers Baxios da Judia, or the 
" Banks of the Jewess ; and still called so by that nation, as well as by all European 
" navigators, except those of our country, where the first charts of these parts, 
" copied from the Portuguese, substituted the word India for Judia." (Sec. V., 
P- 554-) 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. lig 

vpon the Coaste of Melynde, verie ffitt for refreshinge yo r people 
as wee are informed, & whereof the Hollenders had experience in 
their last voyadge that way: The w ch Hand is called Zanzibar, 
where yf you finde yt needfull & haue tyme for that purpose, you 
may theare water and refresh yo r Companies: wheare yt shall 
not be amisse yf you cann haue them, to buy some Oliphaunt^ 
teeth, w ch are bought att Mozambique, & on the Coaste of 
Melinde in greate aboundaunce, & carried into the Indies : That 
Commoditie is exceedinglie well requested m Cambaya. Alsoe 
store of Amber greece, is likewyse to be had in the Coaste of 
Melynde, & att St Lawrence Hand. But goe not either to Moz- 
ambick nor to the Hand of Pemba in any hand but leaue yt on yo r 
labo r side. 

12 ITEM haueing refreshed yo r people w th all speed to shape 
yo r Course for Zocotora neere the mouth of the Read Sea, where 
alsoe is good refreshing, & the best Alloes Zacatrina, in the world, 
whereof we wysh you to buy 2 or 3 Tonns weight: beside yt is 
said there is stoore of Amber greece, & other good things 
whereof we pray you to take notice, & buye what you thinke 
Convenient : but still in all your m r chandizinge be carefull to putt 
of some of yo r English Comodities in truck, in this Hand we doubt 
not but that you may be furnished, both for Pilottf for Aden & 
vnderstand what trade is there to be had what they people be, & 
of what interteynem t toward^ straungers, whereof informe yo r 
selues, in the best manner you may & soe w th all Convenient speed 
direct yo r Course for Aden, or some other place theareaboutf , w ch 
you may learne to be more fitt for intertaynem* of you w tb all the 
3 shipps, you haueing tyme inough to goe into the Indies w th that 
Monsoone, and being arriued neere the place, come to an Anco r , 
but take heede you come not w th in their daunger, 1 still expecting & 
feareing evill though there be noe cause, & by some Convenient 
& speedie meanes lett yt be knowne to the Gou r no r of the place, 
that you are English m r chauntf , & haue brought ires vnto him, 
from the kingf ma tic seekeing onelie peaceable trade, aswell for 
the sale of o r Comodities, as for buying of others, for w ch pur- 

1 Compare the familiar 

"You stand within his danger, do you not ? " 

Merchant of Venice, Act IV., Scene i. 



I20 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

pose we appointe Wiftm Hawkins to deliu r his ma tic8 ires, to 
the said Gou r no r , & therew th such present as you think fitt: & 
to treate w th him for priuiledgC & ffreedome of trade for soe 
many yeares as you cann, declaring that o r kinge is in league w th 
the Grand Signio r that o r people doe trade into Cairo, Aleppo, 
Damasco, Constantinople, & in all other his dominions freelie. 
And that o r kinge hath now a leidger 1 Imbassado r in Constanti- 
nople, w ch loue of the Grand Signio r towardf our Nacon hath 
ymbouldened vs to visitt that place w th our shipps & goodf now 
desireing by his favorable lycence to trade as Ciuill and peaceable 
m r chaunt, & that you desire to settle a factorie theare, yf by his 
honorable favo r you may be pmitted soe to doe: assureing him 
that by o r trade his Customes will be greatlie encreased, for that we 
shall indevo r to fetch that from thence w ch we now fetch from the 
Molloccos Bantam & diuers other places in the Indies: To w ch yf 
he yeald yt shall be needfull that you craue Articles of priviledgf 
from him for o r Nation the better to incourradge vs to frequent 
that place. And for your better direccon, we haue deliuered you 
the Coppie of priviledgf pcured for vs, by S r lames Lancaster from 
the kinge of Achen 2 before mencioned adding therevnto what 
other thingc shall be needfull: In this busines Conferr together 
that you may pceede w th good advise, aswell for the priuiledgf as 
whoe shall be left there for ffacto rs , except Marlowe 3 & Pennell 



1 A resident ambassador, as opposed to one sent on a temporary mission ; cp. 
" Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven, 
Intends you for his swift ambassador, 
Where you shall be an everlasting leiger." 

Measure for Measure, Act IV., Scene i. 
5 See page 69. 

3 Anthony Marlowe "laughing Anthony " as his friends called him was for 
some years a factor in the Levant before taking service with the East India merchants 
(see Lansdowne MSS., No. 421, in British Museum). He soon had need of all his 
cheerfulness, for at Surat he fell into the hands of the Portuguese, and in July, 
1609, we find him at Lisbon sick and in prison, and suffering great privations; 
while, a month or two later, the death of his wife left his child for a time without 
either of its natural guardians. Correspondence on the subject of his imprisonment 
and release will be found on a later page of the present volume. 

Marlowe kept a journal of the present voyage, an imperfect copy of which is still 
preserved in the National Library; see p. 175 of Cal. E. I. State Papers, 1513-1616, 
where, however, it is wrongly spoken of as relating to the Second Voyage. It may also 



EAST INDIA COMPANY. izl 

appointed for other places : Yf he giue leaue to settle a ffactorie, 
you must alsoe declare vnto the Gou r no r what sortf of English 
Commodities you haue brought, but acquainte him w th none of 
yo r money, yf you can sell all the Comodities w ch we now send att 
Aden, we rather desire the same then 1 to make tryall of any other 
place. 

13 ITEM arriueing att Aden, & findeing hope of inter- 
taynem* & trade, we wish you all to spend some few daies in. 
Consultacon & direccons [(] still haueing reguard that you the 
Gen r all w th the Dragon & Pynnasse loose not yo r Monsoone) in 
w ch tyme yf you find that more of o r Comodities will sell theare, 
then is in the Hector, we wysh you to take out of the other 
shipps, what you thinke needfull, and leaue Wrftm Hawkins & 
Clarke w th the Hecto 1 ' & such other ffactors as may be thought 
meete to follow that busynes (whome we wish not findinge 
sufficient & present dispatch of o r Comodities & other m r chan- 
dizes of those ptf sufficient & att resonable prizes to relade the 
Hecto r , then to stay vntill the shipps & lounckf repaire thither 
from Cambaya, & other places w th the next Monsoone, att w ch 
tyme noe doubt you shall finde plentie of all the Comodities, the 
Indies doe yeald, w ch oportunitie we wish you to take[)], And for 
the sale of o r Comodities we wish you to stand, vpon the value & 
estimacon thereof, yett soe as you loose not the oportunitie of the 
first markettf & reasonable offers, least often veiwing them 
they fall to dislike, for Nouelties as you knowe drawe men to 
buie, and note that by the resorte of all sortes of people thither, 
you shall finde meanes to sell what Comodities of o rs are in any 
place requested yf you putt yo r selfe forwarde & by help of some 
brokers you seeke to deale : But you must be carefull to vse all 
men w th kindnes & Ciuillitie & soe 2 that yo r men doe the like in 
any wyse, least disorders & scandalous behavio r cause you to 
be abhored & evill intreated. And for that Clarke hath beene 
brought vpp in the trade of Wollen Comodities, we wysh him to 
be vsed in the sale thereof who can best tell how to handle yt. 

14 ITEM yf you finde theare, that any other of o r Comodities, 

be useful to note in passing that in the index to this Calendar, Anthony Marlowe 
has been strangely confused with Edmund Marlowe, who was quite a different person. 
1 Than. 2 See ? 



122 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

or Coullo will sell better, then those we now send, or some of 
those more vendible than the rest, we desire to be adverticed 
ou r land by some Moores that go to Argier, 1 & direct yo r tres to 
Richard Allen Consull theare, to be sent hither w th speede, or 
to Aleppo to m r Paule Pyndar 2 Consull, obserueing the note of a 
character 3 w cl1 we deliu r you herew th for the better secretie. 

15 ITEM for that we haue put into each shipp a porcon of 
money viz into the Dragon 13 Chestf , into the Hecto r 8 Chestf & 
into the Consent one Chest. Wee pray you to Consider att yo r 
being att Aden, how much thereof, will be there needfull, either 
for helpinge to putt of o r Comodities & m r chandize in barter (yf 
otherwyse the same will nott sell) or to buye such of theirs, as ys 
needfull & ffitt for o r Countrie, & the residue to be continued in 
the Dragon for the Gen r all to ymploy for vs in the Indies. 

1 Algiers. 

2 A well-known London merchant, the remains of whose beautiful mansion in 
Bishopsgate Street, doomed to destruction by the exigencies of railway extension, 
have recently found a home in the South Kensington Museum. The details of his life 
are somewhat obscure, and the dates given in the few desultory notices that can be 
found are meagre and at times contradictory. He seems to have been born at 
Wellingborough, in Northamptonshire, about the year 1566; and, on leaving school, 
was apprenticed to Mr. Parvish, an Italian merchant, who sent him at eighteen to 
Venice as a factor. Here, and in various parts of the Levant, he resided for a long 
period of years, during a part of which he appears to have held the position 
of secretary to the English ambassador at Constantinople. In 1607 we find 
him consul at Aleppo, a post he seems to have retained until 1611, when he was 
made ambassador at Constantinople. This appointment he is said to have held for 
nine years, and to have done much during his tenure of office to improve English 
trade in the Levant. By 1623 he was back again in England, and in great favour 
with James I., to whom he from time to time lent, on occasions of ceremony, his 
famous diamond, said to have been worth ^30,000. This diamond was afterwards 
sold to Charles I., but whether it was ever paid for is a matter of some uncertainty. 
In 1626, Pindar was knighted, and was offered the Lieutenancy of the Tower ; this 
honour, however, he declined, and Charles thereupon made him one of the Farmers 
of the Customs. In addition to this post, and his previous gains from trade, Pindar 
enjoyed a considerable revenue from a monopoly of the manufacture of alum, a 
privilege for which he is said to have paid a rental of i 2,000 per annum. From all 
these sources he had accumulated a fortune then considered as colossal, and in 1639 
he was computed to be worth 215,600 ; but a luckless speculation in East India 
trading with Courten, and the loan of large sums to the king, whose cause he warmly 
supported throughout the Civil War, brought him into financial difficulties; and 
when he died, in August, 1650, his affairs were in such confusion that his unhappy 
executor is said to have committed suicide in despair. 

8 Cipher. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 123 

16 AND haueing pcured the dispatch of the Hector w th her 
full ladinge, o r direction is, that you Wiftm Hawkins retourne for 
England w th the next ffitt Wynde & weather leaueing theare for 
ffacto rs (yf you thinke needfull[)] Hearne & Clarke, & such others 
as you may thinke meete w th orders to ymploy their endevo rs for 
finding out of ffurther trade, aswell for all sort? of Cloth & 
kersies & Coullo rs best requested, as all other of o r Comodities, 
& for the buying of all those Country wares obserueing still 
good & c r teine not? of all sort? of Comodities brought thither 
from out of the East Indies. 

17 ITEM for the better Gou r nm te of yo r men we pray you 
when you departe from each other call to the Gen r all for the 
duplicate of the king? Comission, w ch he hath vnder the broade 
seale, and keepe the same in yo r power. 

18 AND now touching you the Generall we pray you w th the 
Dragon & the Pinnasse to make noe longer stay att Aden then 
you must of necessitie as aforesaid, but therew th takeing due hold 
of the Monsoone shape yo r spedie course toward? the entraunce 
to Cambaya endeyo r ing there to finde out what good saffe Harbo rs 
are thereaboute for vs to trust to, for a mayntenance of a trade in 
those ptf heereafter in saffetie from the daunger of the Portin- 
galls, or other enymies, endevo r ing alsoe to learne, whether the 
kinge of Cambaya or Suratt or any of his havens be in subiection 
to the Portugalls, & what havens of his are not, together w th the 
daungers & depthes of the water there for passadge, that by this 
c r teine notice & diligent inquirie, (w ch we wish to be sett downe 
in writeing for the Companies better informacon) whereby we 
may hereafter attempt for further trade theare, or otherwyse 
desiste. 

19 AND forasmuch as you haue theare but the Read 
Dragon & the Pinnasse doe not in any wyse send vpp to the 
kinge of Cambaia, or putt into any harbo ra , but rideinge att an 
Anco 1 ' in the open Roade some few daies to informe your selfe as 
afore specified, & what trade may theare be had, the sort? 
prises & goodnes of their Comodities, as alsoe what sort? of o rs are 
theare best requested : endevo r ing to drawe the people to come to 
you in their lounckes, or boat? w th some of their m r chandizes for 
w ch you may assaie to barter some of o r owne, or sell & buye as 



124 FIRST LETTER SOOR OF 

you shall finde occasion. Then take yo r speedie course alonge 
the Coaste of Mallabar directlie for Bantam, that you may come 
thither before the Hollenders yf yt be possible, for they will doe 
what they cann to prevent l you att the Molloccos, & refreshing 
yo r men att Bantam & takeing the first of the Monsoone goe 
directly for the Molloccos, leaueing order w th the ifacto att 
Bantam to pvide & keepe all lading they cann gett to furnish you, 
yf you fayle att the Molloccos, or yf the Hecto r should come 
thither to lade. 

20 BUT yf yt shall happen you come not to Zocotora in 
such Convenient tyme as you may Convenientlie goe to Aden, & 
haue the Monsoone to bringe you to the Indies, doe not then goe 
to Aden att any hand, but sayle directlie w th the three shipps 
toward^ the entraunce of Cambaya : whither yf you come aboute 
the Middle of September you shall finde yt sooner, 2 & faire 
weather, soe as you may very saffelie ride in the open Roade. 
At w ch place yf vpon diligent inquirie you finde a certaine & saffe 
expectacon of trade, and that any of o r shipps may goe into saffe 
harbo rs free from daunger of the Portugalls, then doe you the 
Generall in the Dragon w th all speede take yo r Course alonge the 
The dragon to goe Coaste of Malabar toward^ Bantam, w th out any 
fr om a henS, d & ec Ehe stay or abideing to trade by the way in what 
"XuthTshTi place soeu r & take w th you David Middleton to 
assiste att the Molloccos for the buieing of spices 
the Hecto r & Consent to stay in the open Roade neere the barr 
of Cambaya, & by some of the people w cL come out eu r y tyde 
from Suratt we wysh you m r Hawkins to send word to the 
Gou r no r or Comaunder in Suratt, that there is a messenger 
arriued w th ires from the kingf ma tie of England vnto their kinge, 
praying the Gou r no r to send him a Boate w tb saffe Conveyaunce 
to bringe him to Suratt, w tb w ch Conveyaunce yf any come to you 
from the Gou r no r , we wish you m r Hawkins to repaier thither, 



1 Anticipate; cp. English Chunk Liturgy, " Lord, we pray Thee that Thy grace may 
always prevent and follow us." 

2 A mistake for "somer," i.e. summer (see para. 21 of the Company's Commission 
for the Fourth Voyage, infra). 

3 This and the subsequent marginal notes are added in another hand. The 
Assention is mentioned in error for ti,e Consent. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 125 

takeing w tb you his ma ties tres & such other pvisions as you haue 
for that purpose & in yo r Companie take Anthonie Marlowe & 
lohn Hearne and yo r owne servant & comeing to the Gou r no r att 
Suratt, present him w th some such guifte as you shall thinke 
meete & desire him to assist you w th meanes & guidf to the kinge, / 
that yo u may deliu r his ma ties tres vnto him according to yo r 
chardge, w ch haueing obtayned, make all possible speede there- 
w th & deliu r his ma ties said tre, & the present vnto the kinge, 
craueing a speedie aunsweare, and his resolucon, yf he will be 
pleased to graunte you free and saffe trade in his Harbo rs , & 
Countries accordinge to his ma tics tre w th sufficient defence 
agaynst those that shall practise to impeach or hinder the same, 
or annoy or hurte any of the shipps, bodies or goodf of any of o 1 ' 
Nacon, or not. But the better to induce the kinge to graunte vs 
priviledgf & free trade, signifie that we will be readie to bringe 
him Armo 1 ', & other munition from tyme to tyme in o r seu r all 
voyages, for the better inablinge him agaynst his enimyes, besidf 
the increase of his Customes : w ch yf he pmyse to doe, then 
desire to haue Comissioners appointed to Consider w th you of 
Articles for priviledgf of trade, wherein followe such direccon as 
is fornV'lie geven you for Aden (w ch priviledgf being obtayned and 
signed by the kinge, haueing taken yo r leave in Comlie manner, 
& rec d such Comaundem^ in writeing directed to his Gou r no rs 
& Officers of his Townes & port^ for yo r defence agaynst all 
disturbers of you in yo r peaceable trade, & for their Assistaunce 
of you & kinde interteynem te in the same : w th all speede make yo r 
retourne to Suratt, & haueing deliuered that kingf Comaundem te 
to the Gou r no r & Officers, Craue their Assistance] w th Pylottf, & 
saffe Conduccon for yo 1 ' shipp, we meane the Consent, & therew th 
make all the speede you can to gett into the Harbo r , but first 
shew to some trustie Brokers, such patterns of yo r Cloth, kersies, 
and other Comodities as are in o r shipps, takeing knowledge, w ch 
sorte of them will be there sold, & accordinglie giue order to lohn 
Hearne to goe w th the Pylottf to see some putt out of the Hecto r 
into the Consent & therew th order that the said shipp, come w th 
the first oportunitie to Suratt. 

21 ITEM the Consent being arriued in Suratt, & yo r busines 
theare sett in good order, & the same left to the chardge of 



I 2 6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Anthonie Marlowe, and Pennell & ffynch 1 w th such moneys as you 
thinke to be sufficient w th our m r chandize, to relade the Consent 
w th Indico, fine Callicoes, drugge &c: w th what lewels you can 
gett, & leaueing them some small stocke for their mainetenancf , 
being, to remayne theare as ffacto 1 ' 3 . Then you Wiftm Hawkins 
to retourne to the Hecto r , takeing w th you for ffacto 1 ' 3 lohn 
Hearne, Clarke, and Batten, & w th speede to retourne w th the 
Monsoone to Aden, and there to follow the direccon geuen you 
before, for that place. But yf att Aden, you be not kindlie 
intertayned & admitted to trade, then w th the next Convenient 
Wynde to shape yo r course for Bantam, where we referr you to 
Consider w th o r ffacto 1 ' 3 , whether the shipp shall lade theare w th 
pepp, or plie to some other place for lading, wherein we pray you 
slipp noe oportunitie for dispatch. 

22 ITEM touching the Consent, yf she can be laden att 
Suratt as afore said, then w th all diligence, the m r to shape his 
course homeward?, w th such ffacto r or ffacto" as you m r Hawkins 
shall thinke ffitt. 

23 BUT yf noe trade can be obtayned at Suratt for lading 
of the Consent then we wish, the m r to take his direct way alonge 
the Coaste of the Indies to Bantam w th the forenamed ffacto 1 ' 8 in 
her, & there to followe such direccon for her ladinge homeward? , 
as o r ffacto rs att Bantam shall sett downe, either w th pepp theare, 
or to goe for Banda for Mace & Nutmeggf . 

24 ITEM further touchinge the Dragon, we wish you the 
TO lade the dragon Gen r all to vsc all mcancs & diligence to lade her 
w^cioue e s s ,mac n e& w th Cloues att the Molloccos, or yf the whole 
nutmeges ' ladinge of Cloues cannot be gotten, then 
retourne to Banda to furnish out the same, w th Nutmeggf & 
Mace, wherein, as for all other spices we would haue you princi- 
pallie to be advised by Symond Dickenson, who hath best skill 

1 William Finch. He landed with Hawkins at Surat, but was prevented by 
illness from accompanying him to Agra. Later on, however, in the spring of 1610, 
he made his way to that city, and remained there for some time, making occasional 
excursions to other towns, including Lahore, and diligently noting all that he saw or 
heard. In 1612 he formed the idea of returning home overland through Persia and 
Arabia. It proved a fatal resolution, for at Babylon he and his companions died 
suddenly, poisoned by drinking bad water [1613], His journal and notes will be 
found in Purchas. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 127 

therein, And to remember to foresee, that in ladeing either 
Cloues, Nutmegge or Mace, you dense them what you can from 
dust & Rumps that the shipp be not stuffed w th such vnpffitable 
ware as is not worth the Custome, & soe we loose all o r chardgf, 
therefore rather burne the same then lade yt in the shipps & be 
carefull to buie drie Cloues, & not such as are greene. 

25 ITEM be verie carefull that you haue yo r due weight & 
the same putt into baggc, nombred & m r ked & sent abourde the 
shipps w th some of the ffacto rs , or some other trustie pson, w th a 
ire Conteyneing the pticuler of eu r y bagg vnder the nomber, the 
same ire to be deliu r ed to the Pursar whom we chardge to weight 
eu r y bagg, att the takeinge of yt into the shipp, whereby he may 
see that the weight is accordinge to the ire rec d , keepeing eu r y ire 
& entring the Content^ into his booke, whereby yf any erro r 
happen, yt may be found out, w ch we wish you the Generall to 
examine eu r y nighte. that there growe no abuse. 

26 ITEM we chardge that the Pursar be continuallie 
abourde the shipp, and take true notice of all thingf whatsoeu r 
are brought into the shipp or carried out, either by Generall, 
Captaines, nV'chauntf, m rs , Marriners the Pursar himselfe, or 
whosoeu 1 ', the same to be entred into his booke, vnder the name 
of the owner, that eu r y one may haue his due att the retourne, as 
the Pursar will Aunsweare yt w th the losse of his wages. And we 
pray the Generall and Captaines to giue the Pursars strict order 
for pformaunce hereof. 

27 ITEM that there be but one hatch open (yf yt may be) 
att the ladeing of any of the shipps, and all the other hatches 
lockt vpp, & that the m r or one of his matf & the Pursar to stand 
by the open hatches when any goodf are shott into hould, lockeing 
the same vpp, when they haue left worke, the key to be geuen to 
the Generall or Captaine to be kepte. 

28 ITEM to be carefull that nothinge be bought but what 
is especiall good, & that you doe not ou r wett the Cloues, when 
they be laden, fo r o r ouerwetting Cloues, bad Nutmeggf & Mace 
haue tought vs to advise o r ffacto 1 ' 3 to be more carefull. 

29 AND for that voyagf of this condicon & greate chardge 
poe priuate trade cannot admitt any private trade. Our will is, that 

neither you the Generall, nor any other, vpon any 



I2 8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

pticuler or other Accompt then the Gen r all & ioynt stocke doe 
lade or deale w th any of those Comodities heerevnder expressed, 
viz pepp, Cloues, Nutmegge, Mace, Synamond, gynger Indico, 
Callicoes, Amber greece, Muske Alices Beniamin & Gumlacca, 
And that yf any shall soe doe the same to be applied to the 
accompte of the Companie, as o r ppp goodf , yt being noe way 
resonable, that we should paie them their wage w th meate & 
drinke, and they lade those thingf in o r shipps, w ch should defray 
o r chardge. 

30 ITEM in eu r y place wheare you come & trade, compare 
their weight and measures w th o rs , before you buie, to thend you 
may know the better what to doe, & how to make yo r rekoningf, 
for w ch purpose we haue putt sundrie Chestf w th weight^ into o r 
shipps. 

31 ITEM that there be the sufficientest & best advised of o r 
ffacto" appointed to weigh what is bought, by weight on the land, 
& to keepe a gfect booke thereof, that the same may be nightlie 
conferred w th the Pursars Booke, whereby erro rs may be the 
better found out. 

32 ITEM that o r ffacto rs bring or send by the first shipps 
8 or 10 of the dollo 1 ' 8 , or Royalls w ch the Hollenders carrie thither. 

33 ITEM we vtterlie forbid any excessiue drinkeing, ffeast- 
ing, or banquetting abourd the shipps att Sea, or aland it being 
agreate waste & consumpcon of victualls & wyne the Cause of 
many diseases & disorders in the Companie, & therefore the same 
to be spent w th more discrecon & sparinge. 

34 ITEM remember to matt the inside of yo r shipps before 
you putt any spice into them, espetiallie where you lade Cloues 
pepp Nutmegge & Mace, & be carefull to make choyse of yo r 
Nutmeggf that they be lardge & sound, & att the ladeinge 
thereof, doe not lyme them too much, 1 for that burne[th] them, & 
beware you lay the Mace in Canisters in some mtt place by yt 
selfe, that yt be not spoyled by the heate. of the other spices, 
takeing good heede to buie that w ch is bright, & not withered, nor 

1 " It is alsoe to be remembred that 4 or 6 hoggesheedes of slaked lyme be provided 
" for the shipps, for lymeing of the Nutmegges to preserue them from the wormes wherein 
" a moderation is to be vsed in doinge thereof as is shewed at lardge to the Captaines 
" by their Comission." (Court Minutes, nth March, 1606/7.) 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 129 

Redd nor darke browne Colored. And such Cloues as shall be 
free of dust the w ch those people vse to put amongest them for 
their advantage in the weight 

35 ITEM yf necessitie drawe you att the lading of the Cloues 
for bett [er] setling of them, to cast water vpon them, be ye sure 
that ytt be but sprikling w th some thinge for the purpose like a 
watering pott, for that too much wett in o r Cloues in the last 
voyadge brought vs greate damadge. 

36 ITEM we desire that a ffactorie may be settled for vs att 
That affactorie be Banda & an other at Turnato or Tedore the 



4 better to advise vs for trade heere after & there- 



you shall thinckefitt fore doe wigh yQU IQ leaue f acto rs att each p]ace 

w th some reasonable stocke for their mayntenaunce, yf vpon due 
Consideracon att yo 1 ' being theare you shall thinke yt ffitt. And 
seeing we finde by o r last Accompte, That those of Lunto r & Nero 
did sell their Cloues & mace much better cheepe; to receiue their 
& to finde out such paym^ in gould, then in Royalls : namelie the 
p ma c y es be wh h e ad e ?" Bahar of Nutmeggf for 9 Royalls & the Bahar 
of Mace fo[r] 90 Royalls, in sylver: but paying 
w th gould the price of Nutmeggf but 7 Royalls & of mace for 70, 
we therefore thinke yt verie needfull that all meanes be vsed to 
sell o r Comodities for barter or gould : & to fynde out such places 
where gould may be had, as spetiallie as we are informed att the 
Hand of Monaginnye 1 for w ch place one of o r ffacto rs that shall lie 
att Banda, wee hould fittest to be ymployed to this effect: 
Although he goe att the first but as a passenger in some shipp, to 
learne & advise vs the certaintie thereof. 

37 ITEM That the Gen r all & Captaines giue often notice 
to the ffacto 1 ' 8 & others what they are to obserue by this o r 
Comission w th espetiall chardge to the ffacto rs , to make diligent 
inquirie of what Comodities are to be bought or bartered for in 
each Hand, & what Englishe nV'chandize may be there vented, 
& of what kinde & Collo rs most vendable. 

38 ITTEM It is to be remembred that o r ffacto rs att Bantam 

doe their best endevo rs to pcure the Chineses to 

The ffactors at Ban- . r ~. . D . ... r .. 

tam to procure the bring trom Cheney sleave & sowing silkes 01 the 

bringeing thither fl -_. . ,1-1 

Chenesey silkes. COUllO r & S1Z6S W6 haU6 nOW dellU r ed to yOU O r 

1 Nouaginnye on a later page ; possibly New Guinea. 



I 3 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



Generall as alsoe some rawe silkes, that we may fall into some 
trade w th them, & see yf they can sell any of o r English Cloth to 
them, that they may be brought to thuse thereof. 

39 ITEM remember to doe yo r best to bringe for the Lorde 
of Salisburie, 1 some Parrattf Mounckeys Marmesattf or other 
straundge beastf & fowles that you esteeme rare & delightfull. 

40 ITEM for the quantities of money & m r chandize put into 
each shipp, we Referr you to o r invoice deliu r ed you herew th w th 
the pticuler sortf Coullo rs & prises, w th patternes of all sortf 
whereby to make sale. 

41 ITEM whereas hearetofore the Company haue rec d 
greate wronge by the Gen r all & Captaines, m rs , & Marriners 
admittaunce of voluntarie men to goe in o r shipps : We hereby 
giue an espetiall chardge vnto you o r Generall Captaines & m rs , 
that you suffer none such to goe alonge w th you, w dl putt the 
Companie to chardge besidf many other inconveniences, nor any 
but such as shall be allowed of by o r direction, & whose names are 
entred into o r bookes 

42 AS touchinge the ffacto" that are to be left there or 

to be brought home either of those w ch are 

The appointemt; of . 

the ffacto" to be left alredie leftc m the Countne, or of those w* goe 

there to be at the . 

direccon of the now in the shipps i We doe order that the 

Genrall. * * 

appointem* of o r said ffacto to reside in those 
places shall be att the direction and discrecon of you the 
Generall, or in yo r absence of him that shall be cheeffe 
Comaunder by vs appointed, wherein wee hope you will haue 
that Consideracon, as to make choise of the ffittest w ch shall 
be found able & meete to deserue that truste of ymploym tc : 
neither lett o r placeing of the ffacto r3 in the seu r all shipps, as 
they are placed be a rule to you, or any ground to them, to 

1 The celebrated Robert Cecil, Earl of Salisbury, at this time Secretary of State. 
The origin of this instruction is shown by the following extract :" Was Read a 
" writeing from S r Walter Cope in behalfe of a younge man, the w cl ^ he commendeth 
"to goe in the shipps for Parattes, Munkies & Marmasittes for the Lo: of Salisburie 
" praying that he may haue Creditt in those partes (yf need be) for xx or xl H from 
" the Company. Wherevpon yt was resolved that m r Gou r no r doe giue some Con- 
" venient aunsweare to the same: signifieing that forasmuch as the man may die 
"& his thinges miscarrie yt will be more Convenient some of o r men may provide 
" the same, as they shall haue order, &c." (Court Minutes, i6th Jan., 1606/7.) 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 131 

enioye those places of ymploym te : other wyse then they shall be 
found ffitt & deserue. And that amonge such of o r ffacto ra as 
shall be now vsed att the Molloccos, Banda & those places Our 
Order is that you ymploy those now alreadie remayneing att 
Bantam aswell such as you thinke ffitt of as of anie others w tl 
an espetiall chardg to them all, to carrie them selues verie kindlie 
w th those people, for that the Contrarie as we are informed hath 
beene hurtfull vnto vs, for that Brownes vnkinde & churlish 
dealeinge toward^ them, did make many of those people refrayne 
to deale w th him & goe to the Hollenders. 1 

43 ITEM that [as] it is vnfitt & inconvenient that o r trade 

be ympted vnto any but o 1 ' Gen r all Companie : 

not to imparte the . ... 110 j_t_ T 

trade to any by* the it is expresslie ordered, & see the nacto r3 are 

gen'-al! Companie - . . . ._ 

to haue chardge, not to write or advise any their 
pticuler freindf or others of the prices of any Comodities either 
theare bought or sold. But onelie in their Gen r all Ires to the 
Gou r no r & Companie. 

44 ITEM we wish that yf att yo r comeing to Bantam, it 

be not thought ffitt that the Pinnasse be theare 

yf the penasse be not , _ rr- r i i j 

left at Bantam to left to traffique from place to place as we doe 

send some one or . . 

two of O r ffacto desire. Then o 1 will is that some one or twoe 

thence for diu>'s 

places to rinde out of o 1 ' ffacto 1 ' 8 left theare shall by the best meanes 

trade J 

they cann there finde, goe as passengers in some 
other shipps, to finde out trade in such places as shall be 
thought needfull as Mesapatania 3 in the partes of Bengalla 
Cheremandall S* Thome or any other places fitt for trade, & 
to take good observacon what English Comodities, as Iron, 
Tynn, Leade, steele Clothes kersies and Saies w th their seu r all 
kindc & Coullo 1 ' 3 are there best in request, & their value : As 
alsoe what Comodities are theare to be bought, as namely 
Pyntados, & such like, for the Molloccos And likewyse booke 
Callicuttf & lanes called casa, & such other thingf as may serve 
for England where the finest sorte will serve best, w tu Pearles, 
stones, Muske Bezar, & such like, w th their seu r all prices, wherein 
we wishe Pennell to be cheeflie ymployed, for Callicuttf lanes 
&c : & other ffacto rs according to their skill in other Comodities, 
The Omission of seekeinge out whereof all this while hath 

1 See page 86. * But ? 3 See page 73, note 10. 

K I 



I3 2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

retourned to o r greate losse, & to the benefitt of the Hollenders, 
who haue beene laborious and industrious therein : And this 
sending to those places, & inquirie to be made, yf yt be possible 
before the retourne of the dragon from the Molloccos to Bantam, 
to thend that att her retourne for England we may be effectuallie 
adverticed of all theis pticulars soe farr as you may, & of all 
other thinges for o r better direccons of anew voyadge. 

45 ITEM that you the Generall att yo r retourne for 1 
TO bnnge an in- Bantam for England, doe bringe w th you vnto 
ta e m&c C of f S m thinge n ; vs from thence an Inventory of all o r goodf, 

debtf & moneys then remayneing in those ptf, 
The w ch is likewyse to be done by m r Hawkins yf he shall leaue 
any ffactorie els wheare putting to o 1 ' Gen r all accompt all guiftf 
presentf and gratificacons, w ch shall be geven, by any forreine 
Prince or potentate, vnto whom we haue now sent present^ or 
others. 

46 ITEM it is o r expresse order, that by a gen r all Consent 
of yo u the Generall Captaines, ffacto rs , m", & Marriners, some 
good order be by you taken & sett downe in writeing soe soone 
as you come to Sea, Concerning the disposeing of dead mens 
good? in the voyadge, by sale att the Maste, or otherwyse : for 
buiing sellinge borrowing & lending one an other : And orderinge 
what sallarie shall be allowed the Pursar vpon eu r y pounde for 
keepeing accompt thereof, to avoied Controu r sie, & question 
hereafter, & eu r y marriner & other of each shipp, to sett their 
hand or marke vnto the same Order. But yf any ffacto r shall 
happen to die, his goodf, bookes, accomptf and other thingf, 
are to be by order of the Generall & Captaines saffelie reserved, 
& brought home for England. 

47 ITEM now lastlie but w th the first to be remembred we 
Comend vnto you all an especiall care to haue yo r Eyes open to 
all devises & practises w ch may be wrought agaynst you, o r shipps 
& goodf in eu r y place where you come, keeping a Continuall 
watch, whereby you may be readie to prevent any mischeefe 
agaynst you, suspect all, how freindlie soeu r they seeme : be 
readie still & stand vpon yo r guarde, trust not yo r saffetie to 

1 A mistake for " from." 



EAST INDIA COMPANY. 133 

the Carelesse attendaunce of the Comon marriners, whoe will 
not losse their present pleasures, or ease, though the losse of 
their Hues, o r shipps & good? depend vpon yt. And albeyt we 
na ue se tt downe eu r y thinge what we remember 



twiges d eft n to thdr and desier to be desire to be done : in pticuler : 
Yett yf vpon due consideracon you finde cause to 
alter any thinge, w ch we heare haue sett downe, haueing w th good 
aduise resolued therevpon, we referr the same to yo r discrecons : 
And for yo r better & 2 Assistaunce & warie pceedinge therein, 
as alsoe in all other o r affaires we appointe Wiftm Hawkins David 
Middleton & Anthony Marlow, & such others as you the prin- 
cipall Comaunder shall thinke ffitt to Consider and Consult w th 
you the Gen r all of all thingf needfull whome wee wish you to 
ymbrace & vse w th aloueinge respect, & freindlie and diligentlie 
to hearken to their Councells, puttinge in execution what shall 
w th good deliberation be soe agreed vpon. And soe we we 
Comend you & yo r endevo rs to godf pvidence whoe guide you 
w th his feare & defend yo u from all daungers. Amen. 

post scriptum 

48 AND furder o r direccon is That you our Gen r all at yo r 
comeinge to Bantam doe (beside the tre & p r sent to that kinge) 
giue vnto the Admirall & such other greate psonages theare as 
o r ffacto 1 ' 9 shall advise you to haue beene freindlie to them, such 
present^ or gratificacons as shall be thought ffitt. 

49 AND further we wishe that some good course be taken 
That fewer of o r att your comeing thither, that fewer of o r people 

be kept theare, for ease of chardge : yett not 
whollie to be w th drawen thence. 

50 AND alsoe we wish that a ffactorie, or att least some of 
A ffactorie at Pria- o r people be appointed to recyde att Pryamon, 

both for their better health & saffetie, 3 & for 
pcureing for vs pepp & other Comodities yf there shall be men 
& stocke there to ymploie. 

1 The word " notwithstanding " appears to have been omitted here. 

2 " And " has been inserted here by mistake. 

3 See note, page 26. " This [Priaman] is a place of good refreshing, and is very 
"wholsome and healthfull, and yet it lyeth within fifteene minutes of the Line." 
(Lancaster's Voyage in Purchas, Lib. III., ch. 3.) 



134 MUST LETTER BOOK Of 

51 ITEM o 1 direccon is that att yo r retourne from Bantam 
you doe bringe thence for the Companie some small quantitie 
of the East India Tynn for the triall & proofe thereof. 

52 ITEM for better p r servacon of health, o r order is, that 
from tyme to tyme as the water Caske shall be emptied of fresh 
water [they] be forth w th agayne filled w th salt water, for pre- 
vencon of leakeinge and Mustines. 

53 ITEM o r direction is that you make diligent inquirie att 
S fc Lawrence and Zanzabar, & all other places, in yo r passadge & 
retourne of Tydingf of the Suzan : l or yf any English shipp hath 
beene of late w th in theis twoe yeares either cast away or taken : 
or putt in for releefe, in any of those ptf , and receiueing any 
knowledge of her to vse the best meanes you may, for recou r y 
of her her men & goodf . 

54 ITEM the ffacte Comitted in the Indies by S r 
Edward Michelborne 3 thoughe we know o r selues to be 



1 The Hector and Susan had sailed from Bantam on 4th March, 1605, the Red 
Dragon and Assertion following six months later. On the igth December, Middleton 
came up with the Hector, " driving up and down the sea about four leagues off the 
" Cape Boa Esperanca, with ten men in her," and took her into Saldanha Road to 
refit. She had lost company of the Susan three months after they came out of 
Bantam Road, " which ship, the Susan, was never heard of since." (Clayborne's 
account of the Second Voyage, in Purchas, Lib. I.) 

2 Sir Edward Michelborne was a seaman of some note, who appears to have served 
under the Earl of Essex in the "Island Voyage" of 1597, and to have been subse- 
quently concerned in the same nobleman's abortive rising in 1601. He was an 
original adventurer in the Company, his name standing fourth in the list contained 
in the charter ; and he was strongly recommended by the Lord Treasurer for the 
command of the First Voyage. The merchants, however, expressed their desire to 
employ rather "men of their own quality," and Captain Lancaster was accordingly 
preferred to the post. Michelborne, perhaps offended at the refusal of his services, 
neglected to pay his share of the adventure, and was in consequence disfranchised in 
July, 1601. A few years later he became a gentleman pensioner to James I., and in June, 
1604, that monarch, disregarding the exclusive privileges of the East India Company, 
granted Michelborne a license to trade to Cathaia, China, Japan, Corea, Cambaia 
and the adjoining countries. Armed with this authority, he equipped a small vessel 
and a pinnace, and, with the famous John Davis of Sandridge as pilot, sailed from 
Cowes on the 5th Dec. in the same year. After an unsuccessful attempt to trade 
at Priaman, Bantam was visited ; and then a course was shaped for Patani, on the 
eastern side of the Malay Peninsula. On the way a leaky vessel belonging to a party 
of Japanese pirates was met with and assisted ; in return for which, the pirates 
treacherously attempted to surprise the English and seize the ship. They were 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 135 

meerelie 1 Innocent therein, yet yf by any meanes we or o 1 ' 
goodf should be dampnified thereby, we wish you to seeke 
to that kinge & magistrate for redresse & recompence thereof. 
The w ch yf you cannot obtayne. Then o r will is, that you vse the 
benefitt of o r kingf ma ties Comission giuen you in that behalfe. 

55 ITEM after the denture of the said Wiftm Kealeinge & 
Wiftm Hawkins to diuers Coastes, as we haue by this o r Comis- 
sion ordered, yf the said Wittm Hawkins shall happen to die, w ch 
God forbidd. Then we doe appointe in his place for ordering & 
effecting the busines by vs hereby Comitted vnto the said Wiftm 
Hawkins chardge vnto Anthony Marlowe : but neu r thelesse yf the 
said Wittm Hawkins shall happen to die before he shall depte 
Companie w th the said m r Wittm Kealinge for diuers places as 
aforesaid then o r expresse will is That David Middleton be 
appointed in the place of the said Wiftm Hawkins of Leiueten- 
aunte Generall in this present voyadge before any other. As 
alsoe by the death of the said m r Wiftm Kealeing now o r 
Generall to succeede in his place & chardge in the absence of 
the said Wiftm Hawkins by death or otherwyse till their meet- 
inge together agayne in this voyadge. 



finally overpowered after much stubborn fighting, and with the loss of Captain 
Davis and many of the crew. After a further short cruize, Michelborne turned 
homewards, and reached Portsmouth on Qth July, 1606. 

During the voyage several native vessels were overhauled, including a Chinese 
junk bound for Bantam. Although Michelborne states that he paid for everything 
he took, his proceedings seemed to have caused much commotion at Bantam ; 
and the Dutch admiral whom he met at Pulo Sumatra, told him that " the 
" English merchants in Bantam were in great peril, and that still they looked for 
" nothing else, than that the King of lava would assault them because he [Michel- 
"borne] had taken the China ship, whereby the King of Bantam had lost his custom." 
(Purchas, Lib. III., ch. i.) 

The Company appear to have commenced a suit against Michelborne in the 
Admiralty Court on account of the damages likely to be sustained through his 
piratical actions in the Indies, but in July, 1607, it was determined that the suit 
should be dropped, on account of its great expense and uncertain issue. Shortly 
afterwards a reconciliation seems to have taken place, and in Jan., 1608, Michel- 
borne gave the Company his advice as to the course to be adopted in the Fourth 
Voyage. (See note, page 247.) Two years later, a pinnace was ordered to be 
purchased from Sir Edward by the Company. He died, as will be seen from an 
entry on a later page, in the early part of 1609. 

1 Entirely. 



ij6 FIRST LETTER BOOtf OP 4 

56 ITEM we giue you o r Gen r all expresse order for exami- 
tior examinacon O f or nacon of o r ffacto rs dealeing att Bantam in o r 
gen r all accompt & other wayes, & alsoe of all 
their private trade, vsed since their going thither : Wherein we 
vnderstand m r Towerson hath beene a lardge dealer for him 
selfe, haueing sould to the Hollenders att one tyme 300 sackes 
of pepp besidf other thingf very straunge vnto us. And yf vpon 
due examinacon thereof he doe not giue you good satisfaccon to 
yo r content, then we praye you to reduce the same to the Comon 
stocke & the like Course to be taken herein w th all such others, 
that you shall finde faultie heerein for that the same is Contrarie 
to o r expresse order formerlie geuen vnto them. 

57. AND for that we finde best pffitt by the lardg sorte of 
pepp both for the prices that you paye aswell for the one as 
for the other, we pray you att any hand, to buye soe much of 
the largest sorte, as by any meanes you cann gett, & lett the 
same be put by yt selfe into the shipp that yt be nott mingled 
w th any other. And thus not doubting of yo r faithfull care & 
diligence herein Wee pray god to blesse you all & o r affaires 
London the II th of March 1606. 

W m Kealeing 1 
W m Hawkins 
David Middleton. 



JIRSTE 2 yf yt please God to send yo r shipps to the Cape 
Bona Speranza in time, that is by the first of lune 
little more or lesse, & yo r people standing in health, 
myne opinion is that you stay not att Saldania to 
water or refresh, but rather hould on your Course directlie for 
sr lames Lancasters s * Lawrence & touch att the rvver of S* Augus- 
ySSSKSSSi! tine > for theare as I haue beene crediblie informed 
ir e th e e to ^ e st bs i e ndi e a d is as good meanes of refreshing as is att Saldania 
This Course will advantage you much in yo r 

1 See page 38. 

2 See paragraph 10 of the preceding Commission. These notes are entered also 
on the Court Minutes of i3th Feb., 1606/7. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. i 3 ? 

Navigacon to the Coaste of the India : beside the avoydeinge of 
fowle whether, that in that monneth comonlie is in Saldania, 
haueing theare refreshed haue agreate care of the fflattf of the 
Ilandf of ludea 1 for many shipps haue been lost theare, for the 
Currant setteth from the Coaste of S* Lawrence right vpon them, 
soe that yf you be not very carefull to looke out night & daye you 
shall feele them before you see them. Therefore haue a diligent 
care of this pointe for I my selfe haueing twoe very sufficient m rs 
in my shipp was by the said Currant much deceiued, but that 
was in the monneth of September. 

IF by any misfortune you haue further neede of refreshing, 
you shall finde yt att the Ilandf of Comoza 2 but looke to yo r 
selues, for after their tournes are served of such thingf as they 
need they will imploye all their wittf to betray you in what they 
Cann, therefore trust noe men aland for the fflemingf haue lost"" 
men trice in theis Ilaundf & I my selfe once. 3 If the tyme soe 
serue you that yo u cann gett into Indea by the 5 th of lulie, you 
may as you see cause, first touche in the mouth of the Redd Sea, 
for although you make yo r staye there till the middest of October 
yett you shall haue wyndf to bring you to Indea but not longe 
after : but yf yt soe fall out that you see yt will be the midst of 
August or theareaboutes ere you shall gett into the Redd Sea, 
then I would take my Course directlie for Cambaia & follow my 
busines there, for by the 2O th of Decemfc or prime of lanuarie att 
the ffurthest yf yo 11 settle not yo r trade theare, the Wyndf growe 
fayre to goe for the Redd Sea, whither at that tyme yf you take 
yo r Course you shall haue 3 monnethes to staye, to see what you 
cann doe in setlinge yo r trades. And aboute Aprill the West & 

1 See page 118. 

2 The Comoro group, between the northernmost point of Madagascar and the 
mainland. 

3 " From this place we went for an island called Comoro, vpon the coast of 
' Melinde, which standeth about n degrees to the south of the equinoctial : in which 
1 island we stayed all Nouember, finding the people blacke and very comly, but very 
1 treacherous and creuell : for the day before we departed from thence, they killed 
1 thirty of our men on shore, among whom was William Mace, our master, and two 
' of his mates ; the one of them being in the boat with him to fetch water, the other 
'being on shore against our ship; they hauing first betrayed our boat." (From 

Henry May's account of Lancaster's first voyage to the Indies in Markham's Voyages 
of Sir James Lancaster, page 26.) 



138 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Norwest wyndf begynning to blowe, soe that you may retourne 
agayne for the Coaste of Indea, but thinke not to touch vpon the 
Coaste for yt is exceeding daungerous at that tyme of the yeare, 
& from thence till August, & therefore come not neare yt, for 
till august yt is fowle weather, & verie thicke & stormye vpon 
the Coaste of Indea, & the wyndf sett right vpon the Coaste, 
May, lune & lulie, but theis wyndf will carrie you to Bantam, 
but take not too high or Sowtherlie a course for then you will 
hem [out] of the way of the Westerne Monsond that should helpe 
you in this Navigation, but comeing to Bantam before September 
you cannot goe for the Molloccos for the Westerne Monsonde 
reacheth but to Bantam. Therefore as you see cause you may 
touch att Pryamon where is good pepp reasonable good cheepe & 
agood ayre. Note that yf you touch not vpon the Coaste of 
Indea before the 5 th of November, you cannot doe yt till august 
or September come twelue monneth. 




IHEREAS 1 & $$. is enterteyned by vs the Gou r no r & 
Companie of m r chan[tf] of London trading to the 
East Indies to goe as one of o r ffacto" in this p r sent 
voyadge now by vs p r pared toward? the said Indies, & 
is allowed for his ymploym* in the said voyadge the some of 
Bins of aduenture to f r ms p r paracon to Sea the w ch he hath received 
th s?r r fhe mrs f O before his goeing forth. Now knowe yee that we 
the said Gou r no r & Companie for the further 
allowance w ch the said & $5 is to haue & receiue accordinge to o r 
agreem* w tb him doe acknowledge & testifie & doe pmyse & agree 
by theis present? that the said & $$. shall haue & inioy for his 
further allowance & enterteynm 1 in the said voyadge vpon the 
gaine & pffitt w ch god shall send by the retourne of the same 



1 These two " bills of adventure " were read at a Court held the i7th Feb., 1600/1 
and are entered on the minutes under that date. 

2 i.e. page 269. This has been added by another hand. 



Tllti H AST IM1)IA COMPANY. 139 

voyadge, The principall adventure thereof & all chardgf of the 
voyadge first deducted, such rate & pportion of proffitt as yf he 
had beene an adventuro r of the some of fti and as yf he had 

putt in soe much Readie money in stocke in the said voyadge, the 
said rate & pporticon of proffitt to be paied vnto him after his 
retourne into England in such manner & forme as the gaine & 
proffitt of the said voyadge is paied to other the Aduenturo" 
gen r allie vppon the some of fti by them adventured soe as 

he pceede in the said voyadge, & doe not retourne before the 
voyadge be ended. And yf he happen to die before the retourne 
of the shipps from the said East Indies haueing liued & Con- 
tinued in the said voyadge vntill the shipps shall be laden, or 
vntill he or other ffacto 1 ' 8 shall haue contracted & made pvision for 
their ladinge then the said gaine proportioned the saide rate of 
fti adventure to be paied to his Executo r8 administrate or 
assignes, as yt should haue beene paied to him, yf he had 
retourned w th the shipps. Provided alwaies that yf he deceease 
before the shipps shall arrive in the East Indies that then the 
moneys ymprested & deliu r ed him before his goinge to Sea shall 
be vnto him in full recompence of his interteynem* agreed vpon 
for the voyadge And vpon theis Condicons & provisoes before 
mentioned We the Gou r no r & Companie vnder o r Comon scale 
haue geven vnto the said 3 $3 this present bill of Contract & 
adventure dated the 17 th day of ffebruarie Anno Regni Rne Eliz 
quadragesimo tertio. 




IHEAREAS tf one of the Adventurers & one of the 
brethren of the Gou r no r & Companie of m r chauntf of 
London trading into the East Indies haueing sett 
downe for his Adventure w th the said Company for 
their first voyadge into the East Indies the some of fti 

A bin of aduenture starlinge hath not onelie paied the said some of 
to the company. ft j to ^ ^ Threr of the said Company, but 

hath supplied accordinge to the Ordenances of the Company the 



I 4 o FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

some of fti starlinge more w ch is after the rate of ij s the ft of 

his said Adventure. Wee therefore the said Gou r no r & Company 
doe by this o r present bill of Adventure promyse & agree to & w th 
the said & 13. That wee the said Gou r no r & Companie & o r 
successo shall & will vpon the retourne of the shipps or any of 
them sett out by vs in this present voyadge, or w th in Convenient 
tyme after their said retourne in the same deliuer vnto the said 
31 1$ his execute 1 " 8 & admlstra a true & iust accompt & paym tc 
of such stocke, benefitt & proffitt of stocke as god shall send vpon 
the said voyadge according to the gen r all distribution proporcon & 
allotm* w ch shall be allotted disposed and geven to all & eu r y the 
seu r all Adventuro in the said voyage pportionall to their seu r all 
adventures. In Witnes wheareof the said Gou r no r & Companie 
haue heareto annexed their Comon scale The 17 th daie of 
ffebruarie 1600. 




|HE CONDICON 1 of this Obligacon is such That 
wheareas vpon the spetiall request and intreatie of 
the aboue bound & $J. the Gou r no r and Companie 
of the marchauntf of London tradinge into the East 
Indies haue interteyned him the said & 1$. into their service. 
The factors bonde. And alsoe the said H, ft hath agreed & pmysed 
to serue the said Gou r no r & Companie & their 
successo" as their ffacto r & Couenaunt servant in all & eu r y 
such their traffique of m r chandize busynes & affaires what- 
soeu r as they or any by them authorized shall thinke ffitt to 
ymploy him in, as well att, in, vnto, & from the East Indies, as 
att or in any other place or places whatsoeu r dureing the space of 

5 yeares next ensueing the date aboue written, or dureing soe 
many & such tyme of the said ffiue yeares as the said Gou r no r 

6 Companie or their successo" or such as shall be by them 

1 " Ytt is alsoe ordered that each ffacto r giue his owne bonde for 1000 m r ks, and 
" their freindes Bond for aoo 1 '." (Court Minutes, 3ist Dec., 1606/7.) This and the 
succeeding bond are entered on the minutes of the 14th and igth Jan., 1606/7. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 141 

authorized shall thinke meete for such wag? & Consideracon as 
alredie is agreed vpon betweene the said Gou r no r & Companie & 
him the said & Itf. And w ch is specified & sett downe in the 
Courte booke of the said Companie. If therefore the said & $3 
doe henceforth during all the said terme of 5 yeares, or soe longe 
tyme thereof as the Gou r no r & Companie, or their Successo rs shall 
reteyne him in their service well trulie & honestlie serue the said 
Gou r no r & Companie their successo rs & assignes as their ffactor in 
all & eu r y such affaires & busines whatsoeu r as they or such as 
shall be by them authorized shall thinke good to ymploy him. 
And doe from tyme to tyme dureing all the tyme of his service 
diligentlie ymploye & endevo 1 ' himselfe to the vttermost of his 
power knowledge and skill and to the best pffitt he can devise for 
the vse and behoofe of the said Companie in & aboute the 
mannageing excerciseing pformaunce & execution of all & eu r y 
such tramque busines matters affaires & thingf whatsoeu r as by 
the said Gou r no r & Companie or by their assignes aucthorized for 
the tyme being he shall be directed or appointed to deale in, 
pforme and doe. And alsoe yf the said & 13. doe from tyme to 
tyme & att all tymes to the vttermost of his power strength and 
skill not onelie resist & w th stand all & eu r y such pson and psons 
as shall attempt or practise any matter or thinge whatsoeu r to the 
hindraunce hurte or damadge of the said Companie, or of their 
goode m r chandize trade or any of them or any parte thereof: but 
alsoe p r vent and defeate all & euery such practizes attempt? & 
accons whatsoeu r w ch shall or may tend to the damadge defraud- 
inge or p r iudice of the said Companie or of their good? or 
tramque or any pte thereof in any wyse. And ffurder yf the said 
& $3 doe from tyme to tyme giue true notice & intelligence by 
the spediest meanes he possiblie Cann vnto the Gou r no r & 
Comitties for the tyme being or to such as shall be by them 
authorized, or some of them, of all & eu r y such deceiptf wronges 
abuses & hindrances as he shall knowe or vnderstand, or crediblie 
heare to be att any tyme or tymes practized done or offered 
agaynst the said Gou r no r & Company or their goodf or trade, or 
any of them, by any pson or psons in any place or places, 
together w th the names of those psons by whom the same shall be 
$oe offered practised or ^petrated. And alsoe yf the said 21 i$ T 



i 4 2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

doe from tyme to tyme w th in 14 daies next after eu r y resonable 
request to him to be made by the said Gou r no r & Comitties for 
the tyme being or by any by them in that behalfe to be auctho- 
rized not onelie make yeald & giue to the said GoiTno & 
Comitties for the tyme being or to such of their Officers or 
mynisters as in this behalfe shall be authorized or appointed a 
true iust & .pfect Accompte in writeinge of all & eu r y such money 
goodf m r chaundize & other thingf whatsoeu 1 ', as before the 
makeing of the same Accompt shall haue come to the handf 
chardge or possession of him the said H $5. or shall haue beene 
Consigned vnto him for the vse or behoofe of the said Companie, 
and of the disposeing factorage and ymploym* of all the same 
money goodf m r chandize and other thingf whatsoeu r & euery pte 
thereof, But doe alsoe vpon the makeing of the same Accompt, 
or w th in sixe daies then next ensueinge well & truelie deliu r & paie 
vnto the said Gou r no r & Comitties for the tyme beinge, or their 
Officers or mynisters in that behalfe to be appointed, or to some 
of them. All & eu r y such money iewells pearles p r cious stones 
Bezar stones muske & muske Coddf sivit amber greece, goodf 
wares & m r chandize whatsoeu r as by the ffootte of the same 
Accompte shall appeare to be & remayne in his handf or 
possession and for w ch he ought to be chardgable or aunswearable 
in any manner of wyse. And furthermore yf the said &. i3. doe 
not att any tyme heereafter dureing the tyme of his service 
aforesaid directlie or indirectlie by himselfe or by any other deale 
in vse or practise any buieing selling trading or nY'chandizeinge 
for the vse or benefitt of him selfe or of any other parson or psons 
whatsoeu r (except what is now ordered lymitted & allowed him 
by the said Companie as by their Register appeth 1 ^] : but onelie 

1 " Yt is resolved & agreed That yt shall be lawfull for every of the 

said ffactore to Adventure and ymploie in eu r y voyadge for their private proffitt to 
& agayne in the Companies shipps, the some, or value of xxv 11 starlinge in any 
Comoditie of those partes, except spices and drugges, and all manner of pestering 
Comodities, payinge freight and other ordenarie duties for the same. The w ch 25 H or 
value whereof, is to be registred here in England befor shippinge of the same : as 
alsoe how the same is ymployed in the partes beyond the Seas, & that in such manner 
as the Company may haue publicke notice & knowledge thereof, The w ch said 
stock of 25 lj \v th the proffitt of the same is to be retourned in eu r y voyadge \v th out 
' any other private trade of the same & gaine thereof, dureinge the Continuance of 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



143 



to & for the sole & ppper vse & benefitt of the Companie aforesaid 
and their Assignes. And alsoe yf the said E. itf. doe from tyme 
to tyme w th as much speede as possiblie he cann geue intelligence 
& notice to the said Gou r no r & Comitties for the tyme being 
aswell of all & eu r y such pson & psons, whoe being now or att any 
tyme hereafter shall be ymployed in the service & affaires of the 
said Companie, doe or shall vse exercyse or practise any secret or 
private tradinge buieing selling or m r chandizeing in any place or 
places whereby the said Companie shall or may susteyne or incurr 
any hindraunce or damadge, as alsoe of eu r y pticuler of the 
same private tradinge & dealeing accordinge to 
his best knowledge & vnderstandinge. A. And 
alsoe yf the said H $$. at all tymes dureing 
the tyme of his service aforesaid doe gentlelie, 
faithfullie & diligentlie vse behaue & demeane 
him selfe as a good & dutifull servant toward^ 
the said Gou r no r & Cornitties & those by 
them aucthorized. That then this present 
obligacon &c : 



And furder if the 
said A B do not at 
any tyme or tymes 
duringe his Contynu- 
ance in the seruice 
of the said Companie 
send any priuate or 
other Ires from the 
said East Indies but 
that the same be in- 
closed in the publick 
Ires to the Companie. 

This ordered the $ of 
Aprill 1608 1 




HE CONDICON 2 of this obligacon is such That 
wheareas att the spetiall request and intreatie of 
3f. 29. the sonne of the aboue bound lit 29. the 
aboue named Companie of the East India nVchauntf 

" their service w th the said Company, & furder to giue advice in eu r y voyadge 
" whereby the Companie may haue knowledge thereof, that the same may be 
" Registred accordingly for better satisfaccon herein & for performance of their Bondes 
" formerlie entred into for abstayneinge from all other private trade & such like." 
(Court Minutes, aoth Jan., 1606/7.) 

1 This marginal note has been inserted by a later hand. The text as it stands is 
that adopted for the factors of the Third Voyage : and it would appear that the same 
form was used for subsequent voyages, with the addition (after April, 1608) of 
the extra clause here given, which was inserted at the place marked by a caret. The 
entry in the Court Minutes ordering this insertion states that it was done " w th intent 
" that yt may appeare, what each man writeth thence, & that noe man doe write any 
" thinge of the generall affares of the Company to their freindes or others, but onelie 
" in their gen r all Ires to m r Gou r no r and the rest of the Companie." 

? See note, p. 140. From the entry on the Court Minutes it appears that 



i 44 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

haue now hired him the said 3? 29. for one of the third sorte 
of their ffacto 1 ' 9 who by obligacon of the date 

The suterties Bonndes , . . j o i 

aboue written is entred & become bound vnto 
the aboue named S r Wiftm Romeny 1 & Thomas 
ffarrington 2 for thuse of the said Company in the some & 
penaltie of iooo mrk w th Condicon therevnto for his faithfull 
service to the said Company & pformance of sundrie other 
Condicons & thing? in the same Condition expressed as thereby 
att lardge appeth. Now therefore in Case any breach or 
breaches shall hereafter happen to be made of the Condicon 
of the said obligacon wherein the said $. 33. standeth bound 
as is aforesaid, or yf any clause article condicon matter or 
thinge, in the Condicon of the same obligacon expressed speci- 
fied or conteyned, or of any pte or pcell thereof Then yf the 
said i&, M. & 3J. H* or either of them their or either of their' 5 
heires Executo rs or Administrate 118 doe & shall from tyme to 
tyme w th in 14 daies next after notice in writeinge, to them or 
any of them in that behalfe geven by the said S r Wiftm Romeny 
& Thomas ffarrington or either of them, their or either of their 
Executors admTstrato 1 ' 8 or asss or by the Gou r no r or Threr of 
the said Societie for the ty:ne being or by any other being sub- 
stituted or aucthorized in that behalfe by the said Societie or 
Companie well and trulie aunsweare satisfie & paie, or cause to 
be aunswered satisfied & paied vnto the said S 1 ' Wiftm Romeny 
& Thomas ffarrington or either of them, or to the Gou r no r and 
Threr of the said Societie for the tyme beinge to thuse of the 
said Societie the ffull some and value of good & lawfull money 
of England That all & eu r y damadge losse & hindraunce what- 
soeu r w ch shall aryse or growe or be susteyned or incurred by 
the said Gou r no r Threr and Societie of the m r chauntf of London 



J. D. was John Dorchester, R. D. his father Richard, and J. P. John Periam or 
Peryam. 

1 See page 46. 

2 Thomas Farington, vintner, was one of the first adventurers, and was a 
committee from 1601. In 1607 he was elected treasurer, a post which he seems to 
have retained until his death in 1613 or 1614. 

3 "His" is written above this word in the MS , in would-be correction of the 
draughtsman's gramma.r. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 145 

trading to the East Indies or their successo 1 ' 9 , or by any of them 
by reason of any breach or breaches happening of the Condicon 
of the said obligation wherein the foresaid jj. 29. standeth 
bound, or yf any clause article condicon matter or thinge 
therein mencioned expressed or Conteyned shall amounte vnto, 
& whereof & for w ch he the saied lohn Dorchester shall not 
then formerlie haue made fitt and sufficient recompense and 
satisfaccon to the saied Gou r no r Threr and Societie or their 
successo" w th out fraude or further delaie. That then &c : 




[HE TENO R1 of the Bond? of the said m r Kealinge : 
m r Hawkins & m r Middleton in 5OO U apeece : of 
the m rs & m rs mate in 2OO li apeece & of the 
pursars & their matf in 20O U apeece : bound to 
S l> Wiftm Romeny & Thomas ffarrington to thuse of the 
what the Genius : Companie w th their seu r all Condicons as ffol- 

m rs : mates: & Pur- , , _ T . 

sars are bounde in. loweth. VIZ. 

THE CONDICON of this obligacon is such. That whereas 
The captames Con- tne aboue bound Wiftm Kealinge is alredie hired 
& agreed w th all to be ymployed by the aboue 
wthout suerties named Gou r no r and Companie of m r chauntf of 

London trading into the East Indies in this present voyadge 
by them intended into the said East Indies : yf therefore the 
saied Wiftm Kealinge shall not absent him self but willinglie 
goe in the said voyadge & shall well and faithfullie serve the 
saied Gou r no r & Comp : duringe his ymploym* in the said 
voyadge, w th out deteynem* or concealm* of any money gould 
lewells good wares or m r chandizes that shall come to his 
handf or be bought or pvided, by waye of buyinge barter or 
exchandge w th any m r chaunt or nY'chauntC people or forreine 
nation w th whome he shall haue Comerse or traffique during 
the Continuance of the said voyadge, or w ch shall come to his 
handf by way of prize or other enterprize happeninge in the 

Entered on the Court Minutes of 24th Feb., 1606/7. 




i 4 6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

saied voyadge or by way of present or guift from any of the 
princes or others of those places. And alsoe shall vpon his 
retourne in the saied voyadge att any tyme after when he shall 
be therevnto required by the saied Gou r no r and Companie or 
their Assigne or Assignes giue atrue and iust accompt paym* & 
deliu r y of all such moneys gould lewells wares and m r chandizes 
that shall come to his handf by any the waies or meanes afore- 
said duringe his said ymploym* in the said voyadge. And shall 
not duringe his saied ymploym* vse any private traffique or 
trade for him selfe or any other : but onelie for the Comon 
Adventure except what is allowed by the Register of the 
Companie. 1 That then &c : 



HE CONDICON &c: That wheareas the aboue bound 
Hippon 2 is hired by the aboue named Gou r no r & 
Companie of m r chaunt of London tradinge into 
the East Indies to goe m r of the good shipp called 
the Read dragon or in any other shipp where he shall be 
appointed in their present intended voyadge to 
mates condicon the said Indies. Yf therefore the said Anthonie 
wthout suerties Hippon doe not absent himselfe but willinglie 

goe in the said voyadge & therein accordinge to his best skill 
and knowledge guide the said shipp & gou r ne the Marriners 
vnder his chardge in such sorte as belongeth to the place of a 
m r during the said voyadge, and doe not during the said 
voyadge vse any private trade or traffique in m r chandize for his 
owne prop accompt, or adventure or Colo r the priuate trade of 
any other. That then &c : 



1 " Yt is alsoe resolued and agreed that yt shall be lawfull for the Captaines to 
" Aduenture in this voyadge for their priuate proffitt to & againe in the Companies 
" shipps theis somes followinge, or the valew thereof viz m r Kealinge loo 11 , m r Haw- 
" kins 100 m r kes & m r Middleton so 11 : & that in manner how, the same is to be 
" entred & ymployed, as is expressed & yealded to the ffacto rs the 20 th of lanuarie 
" last." (Court Minutes, 5th March, 1606/7.) 

2 Anthony Hippon (see page 114). 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 147 

[HE CONDICON &c: That wheareas the aboue 
bounde 21 13. is hired by the aboue named Gou r no r 
& Companie of m r chauntf of London trading into 
the East Indies to goe Pursar of the good shipp 
called the in the present intended voyadge to the 

The Pursar & pursars said Indies. Yf therefore the saied & 1$. doe 
not absent himselfe but willinglie goe in the said 
voyadge & doe accordinge to the place and 
chardge of a Pursar ymployed in such voyage keepe a true & 
pfect accompt by Inventorie of all such pvision, 
vide fo: 86i tackle, municon, furniture, victualls, & other 

necessaries w ch are or shall be duringe the saied voyadge brought 
abourd the said shipp, or pvided for thuse of the same & the 
Companie thereof. And alsoe an Inventorie of all the goodf 
wares & m r chandize as shall be brought into or carried out of the 
said shipp duringe the said voyadge, aswell belongeing vnto the 
said Companie, or any other pson or psons whatsoeu 1 ' And doe 
likewyse keepe an Inventorie & Accompt of the expence & 
bestowinge of all such pvision Tackle munition furniture and 
other necessaries w ch shalle be brought into or carried out of the 
said shipp & of the remainder thereof, & doe att all tymes beinge 
theareto required deliuer vpp a true accompt of the same to the 
Gou r no r of the said m r chauntf or his deputie, and doe not in this 
voyadge vse any private trade or traffique in m r chandize for his 
owne pper Accompte or adventure, or Collo r the priuate trade of 
any other That then &c : 



A COPPIE of a tre sent to o r loueing freind^ Gabriell Towerson 
Robert Browne and the rest of 6 r ffacto rs att Bantam vnder 
the Companies seale & m r Gou r no M hand by the Dragon : & 
a Coppie thereof vnder the Comp : seale & the Secretaries 
hand by the Hecto* the nth of March 1606. 



L i 




FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

o r hartie Comendacons &c: yo r tre of the third 
of March I6O4. 1 by the Hecto r we haue received : but 
that by the Suzan 3 is not come to o r hands, the w ch 
shipp though we are in agreate doubt, to be miscarried 
for that hitherto we haue neu r had any vnderstandinge of her, yet 
A coppie of a ire neu r thelesse pray you to make diligent inquirie 
Sl^^cSSS of her, & thereby you comeing to knowledge of 
SoTn S eand y^S ner to vsc all possible meanes for recou r y and 
Ban? ?? 3 saffeguard of the shipp men & good? 

ALSOE m r Sydalls tre of the first of October 1 
by the Assencon, & m r Towersons by the dragon of that date : l 
as alsoe m r Towersons of the 20 th of Octob 1 & Sydalls of the 24 th of 
the same monneth 1 sent by the Hollenders shipps, are like wyse 
come to o r handf. All w ch we breeflie aunsweare as followeth. 

FIRSTE touching o r spices sent in o r 3 shipps the last 
voyadge wee finde them to fall out exceeding light in weight of 
that w cL we doe comonlie accompt, & especiallie in the Cloues, 
w ch we finde to want aboue 18 or 20 Tunns weight^, of w ch wantf 
we much marvell, And therefore pray you to advice & Consider 
amongest yo r selues how to finde out the same : & thereof w th the 
first to geue vs informacon, for trulie eyther there hath beene 
many more said to be paied for on the land, then hath been 
receiued into the shipp; or being putt into the shipps of 
necessitie by some indirect meanes they are missinge : But wee 
are rather pswaded they were neu r brought into the shipps, 
though we haue paied for them, & for that the shipps came not 
full home, the w dl wante as the same is greate wee cannott 
endure. 

TOUCHINGE the Condicon & qualitie of o r spices, you shall 
vnderstand first that the pepp was reasonable Cleane, although 
we lost much by yo r garblinge theare, w ch Course notw th standinge 
we rather wysh to be vsed, then to send yt home dustie & 
vnclensed, whereby wee are compelled to paie freight & Custome 
for garble yett desier that o r spices yf yt be possible be soe 
bought in, as theare shall not be in Clensing thereof soe greate 
losse. 

1 Not now extant. See p. 134. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 149 

OUR Nutmeggf were exceeding badd, beinge light, not 
haueinge their full ripnes, w ch afterwardf w th Carriinge & 
remoueinge tourned to dust, to o r greate losse, as indeede not 
w thl the bringing home besidf the freight & Custome we paied 
for them : Att w ch ignoraunce of you, to buie such spices, we 
conceiue the Indians doe reioyce : But yf you shall be inforced to 
take such spice, or none att all, you are, as neare as you cann to 
make the price theareafter, and then haueing bought them, cause 
them to be theare clensed & garbled, to w ch end & purpose we 
haue now as before sent you Garblers. 

OUR mace bought att Bantam proueth indifferent good : but 
that pvided att the Molloccos verie euill blacke & burned, soe as 
they will heare yeald noe money, Yf they were drie & well 
Collo r ed when you putt them abourd : then yt must be that the 
ou r much lyme you putt amonge the Nutmegf & the macf on or 
amonge them spoyled both thone and the other. 2 Therefore 
henceforth haue an espetiall care herevnto both in buieing of 
Nutmegf & mace, & seu r ing the mace from the Nutmeggf in 
some Convenient place by them selues : Although yt be neces- 
sarie in the Nutmeggf for the avoydeing of the worme, yet you 
are to be carefull not to ou r lyme them : & for yo r better helpe 
herein, & for choise of spices, wee haue now sent Symond 
Dickenson one of o r ffacto rs who can geue you good direccon in 
this respect. 

LYKEWYSE you are to be carefull as much as you may to 
avoied the buieing of Cloues when they are greene for p r venting 
the losse that happeneth thereby : As alsoe to foresee that there 
be not much dust or sand putt into them by the Countrie people 
to make them weigh heavie, yet we wish you not to garble yo r 
Cloues, not yett to refuse greene Cloues : yf either the vse be to 
buie them soe : or that the Hollenders would otherwyse prevent 
you of them. 

WEE vtterlie dislike of yo r pticular advice to yo r private 
freindf either of what Comodities are theare requested, or there 
alsoe to be had, or of the prices, wherein you are altogether verie 
sparinge to advice the Gou r no r & Companie in yo r gen r all ires 

1 Worth. 2 See page 128. 



1 5 o FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

vnto them : as we are yo r m rs & beare yo r Chardge & sallarie 
theare, soe ought you to vs in gen r all to giue adverticem* of all 
theis thingf the w ch we expect att yo r handf : wherein we requier 
you to be more carefull & more diligent to write vs, then 
heretofore you haue beene as alsoe in seeking out what sortf & 
kind? of all Clothes, kersies & wollen Comodities are theare most 
vendible w th the Coullo" & kindf & in what place by name they 
may be best & in most aboundance vttered : As alsoe leade Iron 
Tynn safferon steele heedpeces long swordf kniues and glasses 
&c : & what els soeu r of o r Countrie Comodities are vsed & will 
vent in those places. 

AND lykewyse to informe vs the quantitie kindf & prices of 
all Indea Comodities, & wheare they may be best had, namelie 
all sortf of spices Bezar stoanes, Diamondf , Rubies, pearles &c : 
Indico & booke Callicuttf white w ch are for England & all sortf 
and kindf fitting for the Mollocos And further yf Cheny silkes 
are not there presentlie to be had, that then you advise the 
Cheneses to bringe thereof thither both white soweinge silke, 
twisted of all sortf & sizes as also rawe & sleaue silke, of all w ch 
we haue geuen m r Keelinge examples : the w ch silkf yf you can 
pcure to be brought thither att reasonable prices we suppose 
some good promtt may be had thereby, of all w ch you haue 
hithertoo kept vs ignorant, whereby we must conceiue you to 
be either vnskilfull in m r chandizeinge, or vnwillinge to pforme 
that for w cb we keepe you theare : Not doubting but you will 
hereafter make yo r ymploym^ theare more pffttable vnto vs, 
& o r Comon wealth, as the takeinge examples by the Hoi- 
lenders whoe are verie carefull, industrious & diligent in this 
respect. 

AND because o r ires doe some tymes miscarrie, or are by 
some evill willers intercepted, we wish you to write vs as often as 
you may & then diuers tres att one tyme, & send the same by 
sundrie passengers geveing them speciall Chardge for the saffe 
& speedie dehVy there of. And yf in the absence of o r owne 
shipps, you doe att any tyme write by the Hollenders we pray 
you deliu r yo r Ires to their ffacto" theare, to inclose them in 
theirs w ch they shall send either to m r Arnold Verhoven to 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 151 

Middleborrow, 1 or to m r Dericke von Osse or other their princi- 
palls att Amsterdam, but rather to Middleborrowe for that 
thereby they will come sooner to o r handf . 

WEE haue now in this o r present voyadge sent m r Wiftm 
Kealinge w th Comission from his ma tie authorizeinge him as 
Generall, and w th Comission from vs for his directions in this 
ymploym* whome we will you to obey, & to yeald vnto him that 
obedience as hath beene formerlie yealded to his p r dicesso rs in 
that place of Generall S r lames Lancaster, or S r Henrie Middle- 
ton giueing accompt of all yo r pceedingf since the depture thence 
of o r last shipps : As alsoe the best advice you may for his better 
pceeding in that busynes we haue now comitted vnto him & the 
rest of o r ffacto rs And as he shall thinke ffitt to dispose of any of 
you in o r affaires o r will is yo u obey his direccon therein we haue 
espetiallie apointed him for this busynes, and tramque & trade in 
those places where we haue thought fittest wishinge him to take 
yo r informacon by yo r aboade theare, yf you knowe of any place 
better for o r trade, hopeinge that you haue made such good vse 
of yo r staye theare all this whyle, as that you are able to direct & 
advise him for o r best good. 

AND touching the ffacte Comitted by S r Edward Michelborne 
in the Indies, 2 though we knowe o r selues to be meerelie innocent 
therein : yet yf by any meanes wee or o r goodf should be 
dampnified thereby we wish you to seeke to that kinge & magis- 
tratf for redresse thereof, the w ch yf you can not obtaine, then 
wee must [be] forced to seeke the best meanes we may for 
recompence & restitucon thereof. Of w ch pointe o r Generall m r 
Kealinge doth vnderstand o r resolucon more att lardge. 

AND for that we finde best promtt by the lardger sorte of the 
pepp according to the prices that you paye, both for thone & for 
thother, we pray you att any hand to buie soe much of the 
lardgest sorte, as by any meanes you can gett, & lett the same be 
putt by yt selfe into the shipp that yt may not be mingled w tb any 
other. 

1 Middelburg, on the island of Walcheren, about five miles from Flushing, was at 
this time one of the most important trade centres of Northern Europe. 
2 See page 134. 



I5 2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

AND thus not doubting of yo r faithfull care & diligence herein 
we pray God to blesse you all & o r affaires. 

Yo r loueing freindf 1 the Gou r no r Comitties 
& gen r alitie of the Companie of nVchauntf 
tradinge into the East Indies. 




|FTER 2 o r hartie Comendacons &c : yo r tre dated att 
Plymouth the 19 th of this instant we haue rec d whereby 
we are verie sorrie to vnderstand of yo r want of men, 
but espetiallie of the evill Condicon of yo r shipp, w ch 
we hope, as she shall growe lesse laden by expence of her victuall 
soe she will become in a better trym. ffor yo r 

from the Comp : of ^ f . 

East India mar- resolucon vf you heare not ot vo r Admirall & the 

chaunts to Capt : MI i 

Dauid Middieton at Hecto 1 ' you will doe yo r best endevo r to gett 

Plymouth. J J 

sufficient men, & begon to Sea w th the first : we 

1 This familiar and affectionate valedictory form was observed by the Right 
Honourable the East India Company of England in all their letters to the employes 
in their trade, and continued to be used by them to the very close of their rule [1858] 
over British India. It implies, as did the Company's whole treatment of their 
employes, a humane and conscientious recognition of the risks to health and life 
incurred by those who were engaged in the promotion of their interests in the East ; 
and who repaid tenfold, in steadfast faithfulness and zeal in the discharge of most 
trying duties, the regard and consideration extended to them by the Company. It 
was by these relations of staunch loyalty between employer and employed that the 
vast fabric of the Indian Empire was gradually built up ; and this fact should always 
be borne in mind by the successors of the Company in the administration of the 
government of British India, and equally by the responsible Ministers and the 
subordinate officials of the Crown ; for if servants are what their masters make 
them, masters are also just what their servants make them : 

" Nam ut servi volunt esse herum, ita solet, 
Bonis boni sunt ; improbi qui malus fuit." 

2 "At this court was red a Ire from Captaine David Middieton dated at Plymouth 
" the 19 th of this instant, importeing his stale theare for the Dragon & Hecto r , w ch 
" he dailie expected, w th intimacon of the want of some of his men, & his intencon to 
" take vp moneys to hier men, & to departe on the voyadge w th in 3 daies. wherevnto 
" order was geuen to o r Secretarie for aunsweare thereof, & for goeing not to Saldania, 
" but to St Augustine : and in what manner &c : As by the Register of Ires d> : at lardge 
" appercth" (Court Minutes, aSth March, 1607.) 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 153 

doe approue & like thereof, & the rather in reguard, you feare yo r 
shipp will be hardlie able to keepe Comp : w th the rest : yett we 
doe wish you not att any hand to goe for Saldania, but directlie 
accordinge to yo r Comission for the porte of St Augustine in S* 
Lawrence, & there haueing refreshed yo r selues (& the other 
shipps comeing not thither in due tyme) o r order is that seing yo u 
are alone you shape not yo r Course to the Hand of Sacatrina, or 
towardf Cambaya but to keepe the high Seas, & goe directlie to 
Bantam. And being theare to Conferr w th o r ffacto rs aswell for 
sale there in Bantam of such Comodities as you carrie w th you, as 
alsoe for yo r goinge to the Hand of Banda, to lade Nutmeggf and 
Mace & to Tomato & Tedore to lade Cloues & to take w th you 
such of o r stufff as are alredie att Bantam, of o r old remayndf : 
as alsoe such other thingf & m r chandizes as you now carrie from 
hence, or shall thinke ffitt to buie in Bantam to carrie w th you for o r 
most proffitt: And likewyse some of o r ffacto" theare as are best 
acquainted w th theis businesses & places : doing yo r best endevo 
to bringe thence onelie Cloues Mace & Nutmeggf or what els you 
shall finde there to be pfitable, for yo r better direction wherein we 
wish you to pvse the booke that we gaue you of the discription of 
the Molloccos & Banda 1 w tl1 the Comodities that are to be carried 
thither, or to be bought theare. And thus haueing theare gotten 
yo r lading of Cloues Mace & Nutmegg to retourne to Bantam. 
In the meane season we would haue you geue o r ffacto rs theare 
greate chardge to make pvision of ladinge for the Dragon and 
Hecto 1 ' against their comeing thither. Yet we leaue all all thingf 
to yo r good discrecon (in this yo r absence from the rest) where 
otherwyse Convenientlie you cannot doe : Praying you for 
p r vencon of the daungers of Sea & Land : & inquirie for the 
Suzan &c : diligentlie to pvse o r gen r all Comission, & to make 
good observacon thereof. Wherein as we doubt not of yo r 
vigilant & faithfull care we pray god prosp you. London the 
28 th of March. 1607. 

Yo r loueing ffreindf the 
Companie of East 
India m r chaunt. 



' Possibly the notes on pages 73-80 of the present volume. 



154 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 




o r hartie Comendacons &c : forasmuch as 
amongst other thingf : Wee vnderstand by tres from 
m r David Middleton at Plymouth, that he intendeth 
(yf you come not thither w th in 3 daies) to doe his best 
endevo r to furnish himselfe w th men as he doth want & to goe 
directlie forward to Sea, & the rather in reguard 
Sp^o Ea mr In w tha * b y the evill condicon of his shipp he maketh 
SrdVsh^^ 11 doubt she will hardly keepe Companie w th the rest, 
w t]l out some hindraunce to the voyadge. Wee haue 
thought good to advertise you thereof, & to that end we doe send 
you herew th the Coppie of m r Middletons said tre vnto vs, & of o r8 
in aunsweare of his, whereby you may be the better furnished to 
dispose yo r busines accordinglie : Yett least padventure he be 
forced, or through some occasion should not psecute his intended 
depture, we pray you in any wyse to send one of yo r Boatf into 
the sound of Plymwoth to call him & take him w th you. And 
furder we wysh you att yo r arrivall att the porte of St. Augustine 
& finding the Pynnace there, & her saileinge soe amended as she 
may be ffitt to keepe Companie w th you, then to proceede on yo r 
voyadge alltogether, according to yo r first gen r all Comission 
from vs, of w ch we desier you to make good observacon but yf her 
sayleing shall not be to yo r likeing: but should hinder yo r 
voyadge yf you should take her w th you, then wee pray you send 
her alone [by] the high Seas directlie to Bantam : And doe you 
pceede toward^ Sacatrina, Aden & Cambaya as to yo r good 
discrecons shall be thought most fittinge. Where vnto we refer 
vs, as not doubtinge of yo r wysedome & greate care to dispose all 
thingf to o r best good, wherein God giue you the most of his 
diuine pvidence. London the 28th of March 1607. 



Keeling seems to have been at this time in the Downs. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. $55 

A REMEMBRANCE 1 of the Conference & agreem* betweene the 
Gou r no r and others of the East India Comp : & the ffarmo 18 
of his ma ties Customes in the presence of the Lo : Threr the 
5th of Aprill. 1607. 

i 

| HAT wheareas question is made touching the validitie 

in lawe of the Patent of the East India Companie for 
that pointe of transportacon free of Custome, of such 
goodf brought in by them haueing form r lie paied 
Custome inward^ 2 : & the matter in some sorte debated before 
his LP : betwixt the Gou r no r of the said Companie & the ffarmo r8 
of his ma*f Customes, soe as his L: is pleased to write his ire to 
the kingf Atturney gen r all for his opinion touchinge the same. 

Note that his Lp: is furder to be remembred according vnto 
his expresse pleasure that yf the said Pattent be founde insuffi- 
cient in Lawe that then his Lp : is pleased to pcure a privie scale 
from his ma tie , that the said Gou r no r & Companie, or any free 
brother of the said Comp: that shall buy any of the said Com- 
panies goodf, may in gen r all & in pticuler transporte all or .pte of 
the said goodf brought in by them free of Custome w th in thirteene 
monnethes after the disc.hardginge of the said goodf , soe as the 
subsidie & Custome for the same haue beene paied or Com- 
pounded for inwardf . And that for such goodf as haue latelie 
beene brought in by the said Companie for w ch the Custome is 
paied for & Compounded, may w th in 13 monnethes after the 
dischardge of the said goodf be freelie transported by any brother 
of the Companie, or any other of the kingf ma*f subiectf w th out 
any further paym* of Subsidie, or Custome for the same. And 
further to expresse in the said privie seale, that yt may be lawfull 
for the said Gou r no r and Companie to shipp out their goodf for 
the East Indies free of Custome : 4 voyages accordinge to the 
Teno 1 ' of their Charter. 



1 This memorandum is entered, but without explanation or comment, on the 
Court Minutes for gth May, 1607. At the next meeting (i3th May) it was ordered 

that " consideracon be had howe farr the agreemt be followed, & by whome 

" & when," but no further reference to the matter can be traced. 

2 See page 179. 




1 5 6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

ORDINANCES Established and Confirmed for standinge Lawes, 
to be holden and observed by this Societie, vppon the seu r all 
penalties thereby seu r allie lymitted. As ffolloweth. viz. 

JTT IS ordeyned & decreed that all the p r paracon of 
moneys m r chandizes and other provision for this 
present voyadge and all Comodities, moneys lewells & 
other m r chandize retourned in the said voyage, shall 
be holden reputed & accompted, and be carried mannaged 
ordenanccs for the ordered and handled as one entire, ioynt and 
!n ad a foyJt e e Socke Comon stocke of adventure Where in noe private 
traffique barter exchandge or m r chandizeing shall 
be vsed practized or admitted by any pticular Gou r no r Captaine 
Marchant Agent, ffacto r , m r , Mariner, Officer, or any other pson 
whatsoeu 1 ymployed in the said voyadge, or .pmitted to goe in the 
same, vpon paine of the losse and forfecture to 
aduentures as are thuse of the Generall Comp i the Adventures in 

traded priuatelie. . . r ., r , ,, 

this voyadge of all somes of money lewells wares, 
good? or m r chandizes w ch shall be found in the said shipps, or 
elswheare carried forth, or retourned home by any private or 
pticut man, & not Conteyned & brought into the gen r all & Comon 
accompt and ioynt Aduenture of the said voyadge. And to thend 
this preiudice of private traffique may the better be avoyded. It 
is alsoe ordeyned appointed, that due inquisicon be made in all 
& eu r y the seu r all shipps of the said voyadge, and elswheare by 
search of all such Chestf boxes packes PackettC bookes writeingf 
& other meanes whereby discou r y may be made of the breach of 
this Ordinance. 

AND YT is in like manner ordeyned and decreed for the 
avoiding of all vnfaithfulnes & deceipt to be vsed in the said 
voyadge in the defraudinge of the generall Adventure w ch is 
p r pared and sett forth att the greate Costf & Chardgf , of such as 

1 " At this Co r t the companie accordinge to ther priviledg proceading to establish 
" and enacte certain Decrees and lawes fitt for the present occasion, and to be vsed 
11 as directions, for the guiding of the trade and traffique belonging to y present 
" voyage, nowe to be sett forth Do at this assemblie ordeine and Decree thes severall 
" ordinaunces to be holden and keptas standing ordinaunces to be vsed in the voyages 

" w^out alteration or chaunging the teno r whereof hereafter ensue videlt " 

(Court Minutes, loth Feb., 1600/1.) 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 157 

repose their trust and Confidence in the Officers & ministers 
ymployed in the said voyadge, that what pson soeu r shall be 
agaynst ymbezei- ^ound vnfaithfull or vniust in the said voyadge by 

ymbecillinge or w th drawinge of any the good? 
wares m r chandizes lewels or other Comodities whatsoeu r either 
belongeinge to the Adventure sent out, or being pcell of the 
retourne of the same, w ch was, is, or shall be eyther p r pared 

bought or belongeinge to the comon or gen r all 
Ixciuded* 1 from de 2 . stocke or Adventure, that such pson shall be 
SfiaSe 6 for their barred & excluded to demand of the Gou r no r & 

ymployment. - . . - _ 

Compame of the said marchauntf* of London 
tradinge to the East Indies any accompt reckoninge or paym* of 
any wage sallarie Contracte or interteinem* for his ymployment 
in this voyadge where vnto he was or otherwyse might haue 
beene interessed yf such Offence had not beene Comitted. And 
furder that eu r y such pson soe offendinge shall be psecuted by the 

said Gou r no r & Companie of the said m r chauntf 
by ft th e e r ia p we 'accord- of London tradinge into the East Indies, accord - 

inge to the qualitie of his offence in that behalfe 
by the lawes and statutf of this Realme. 

AND furthermore yt is ordened that yf vpon the dehVie 
of her ma ties ires to the Princes of those places where 
o r ships shall arriue The Generall & ffacto rs shall be 
peaceablie rec d & interteyned as nVchauntf to Comerce 
& traffique w th the people of those Countries or places, & be 
kaueinge of factors secured & warranted hereafter to frequent & visitt 
m the East indies those %t. Then yt is ordeyned & decreed that 
there shall be elected out of the youngest sorte of ffacto rs , or 
others interteyned or voluntarilie suffered to goe in the voyadge 
such and soe many of the aptest, & towardest of them as o r 
principall m r chaunt shall thinke meete, & w ch shall [have] best 
approued themselues fitt for the ymploym* of the said Companie, 
to resyde & abide in the said places where they shall be soe 
peaceablie rec d yf they may be pmitted there vnto Takeinge 
sufficient & carefull order for the defraying, & supplyinge of their 
chardgf , vntill theis places shall be heere after visited w th another 
ffleete from hence. And leaueing w th them such advise & 
direccon for the better Informacon how to carrie themselues in 




158 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

those places, as by the good direccon of o r principall m'chaunt w th 
thadvise of such as he shall Consult w th all thereof shall be 
thought meete as tyme & experience of those places shall direct 
them whilst the shipps doe lye in those ptf . 



JHEARAS 1 the Queenes most excellent ma tie by her 
gracf ires Pattern^ vnder the greate scale of Eng- 
land beareing date the 31 th day of Decemb in the 
43th yeare of her ma ties Raigne hath incorporated 
this Societie by the name of the Gou r no r and Companie of 
nVchauntf of London tradinge into the East 
Indies, & hath geuen them the sole trade of 
the said Indies by all such waies & passages as they shall 
thinke meete to visitt those ptf, either by the way & passadge 
alreadie found out w ch is by the Cape bona spei or by such wayes 
and passages as shall be heereafter found out by the partf of 
America to enioy the said trade for the terme of 15 yeares from 
the ffeast of the nativitie of o r Lord God. 1600. And whereas 
this Societie in their settinge forth of their late voyadge by the 
Cape of bona Spei : toward^ the Ilandf of Sumatra, lava, and 
other the ptes theareaboutf intendinge to trade those Ilandf, 
and places, for Pepp spicf Gould and other m r chandizes w ch are 

1 "According to the gen r all order taken at the last gen r all Courte touching the 
" devysing and conceaving of lawes and ordinaunces for the better governm* of the 
" state of the trade, the Comitties then appointed did at this Court present ther 
" opinions by certein ordinaunces by them devysed and offered the same to the 
"Consideration of the Gen r alytie w ch severall ordinaunces being divers tymes' 
" distinctly read and waighed and in some pointes reformed by this Court in ample 
" number assembled and throwghly digested and severally putt to Scruteny and 
" erection of handes the same severall lawes are agreed vppon establyshed and 
" confirmed for standing lawes and ordinaunces to be holden and observed by this 
" Soscyety vppon the severall paines and penalties therin severally Limited the teno r 

" of w ch Lawes Do followe in thes wordes videlt : " (Court Minutes, nth Jan., 

1601/2 ) 

There are a few variations in the copy entered on the Court Minutes but none of 
any importance. 

See also Preface to Dawn of British Trade to the East Indies, p. xiv, and the note on 
page 21 of the present volume. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 159 

likest to yeald the most pfitable retourne for the Adventuro" 
in the same voyadge haue sett forth the greatest gte of their 
Aduenture in English money Coyned a purpose for the said 
voyadge, 1 & other forreyne Coyne currant in those Ilandf, 
w ch moneys & Coyne they could not p r pare but w th greate diffi- 
cultie & trouble, and not w th out some mislike of the transportacon 
of Treasure out of this land. They therefore being desirous to 
vse the priviledgf to them graunted, rather for the good of the 
Comon weale of their Countrie, then for their private benefitt, 
& to maintaine the trade of the East Indies, yf yt be possible 
by the transportacon and vent of Cloth, & other the Natiue 
Comodities of this Realme, w th out any money att all, or ells 
soe little as may be Convenientlie tollerated, doe resolue to 
attempt the discou r ie of a passadge by Seas into the said East 
Indies, by the Norwest thorough some jpte of America, w ch yf 
they finde Navigable then shall they by that passadge arryue 
in the Countries of Cataya and China being the East pt of 
Asia and Affrica Climattf of that temperature, w ch in all likeli- 
hood will afford amost liberall vent of Englishe Clothes and 
kersies to the gen r all advauncem* of the traffique of m r chandize 
of this Realme of England. And to thend to putt in execucon 
aswell this their resolucon of discou r ie of the said passadge, as 
other wyse to bringe them selues and their trade generallie to 
any Conformitie and order They doe accordinge to the libertie 
to them geaven by the said tres Pattentf for the makeing of 
Lawes, constitucons, orders and Ordenances for the better 
advauncem* & contynuaunce of their trade and traffique, 
make, ordeyne and Constitute theis seu r all lawes constitucons, 
orders, & ordenances, following Viz. 

FFYRSTE yt is ordered and decreed by & w th the gen r all 
Consent of this Courte for a standing & vnchangable decree 
that w th all convenient expedicon there shall be p r paracon made 
for the attemptinge of the discou r y of the Norwest passadge to 
the East Indies : wherein shall be vsed twoe shipps or pynnacf 
of such burthen & makeing as shall be heereafter Considered of 
& resolved to be ffitt for the said voyadge, & manned victualled 

1 See page 13. 



160 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

furnished & pvided w th such numbers of men & municon, furniture 
victuall m r chandize, & other thingf as the Comitties hereafter 
nominated, & appointed for the pvision thereof shall thinke 
meete & for the levyinge of such moneys as shall defrey the 
Charge of the p r paracon of the said shipps or Pynnasses, & all 
other thingf incident to the said voyadge. And for the bringing 
in of the said moneys : It is ordered that eu r y brother of this 
ffellowshipp that hath Contributed & adventured in the former 
voyadge to the East Indies by the Cape of bona Spei : shall 
contribute to the settinge forth of this present voyadge after 
the rate of xij d att the least vpon eu r y pounde of his former 
Adventure by him adventured, or wherein he is interessed w th out 
supply. And yf any brother of this ffellowshipp shalbe willinge 
voluntarilie to bringe in agreater contribucon, then after the 
said rate of xij d in the pound of his said Adventure in the 
former viadge yt shall be att his pleasure. And to thend to 
stirr vpp men the rather to enlardge their said contribucons to 
this enterprize. It is alsoe ordered & agreed that after what 
rate or pporcon soeu r any man shall Contribute in this discou r y, 
yf the passadge be found out, That he shall in all viages here- 
after to be made by the said passadge be aporcioned or stinted 
The brmginge in of in hi s Aduentures according to the same ppor- 
tion or rate And noe otherwyse. And yt ys 
alsoe ordered and agreed that the said contribucon shalbe 
brought in by eu r y the Contribute 1 " 3 in this manner Viz*. 
The one halfe before the xx th day of lanuarie next comeinge, & 
the residue or soe much thereof as shall be found necessa[rie] 
att the goinge away of the shipps to be paied to the handf 
of m r Aid Cambell 1 appointed Threr for the same viadge. 

1 Thomas afterwards (1603) Sir Thomas Cambell, Alderman, Sheriff (1600-1), 
and Lord Mayor (1609-10), was one of the most prominent of the early adventurers, 
and was governor of the Company in 1602-3. He acted as treasurer for the voyage 
to the North-West here referred to, and the first court-book contains numerous 
references to his services in that capacity. He was one of those nominated for the 
post of governor in 1609, but was not elected. During the year of his mayoralty, he 
preferred a demand for 100 Ibs. of pepper at 2$. per lb., but the Company refused to 
comply " for precedent's sake "; in recognition, however, of his favours towards them 
about the Bridgehouse, Leadenhall, &c., they sent him half the quantity asked for, 
as a free gift. He died on the i3th Feb., 1614. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 161 

Provided alwaies that yf any brother of this ffellowshipp [shall 
deny] to bringe in his said Contribucon att the Rate of xij d 
the pounde of his form r Adventure, or doe not bringe in the 
same att or before the daies & tymes before lymitted That 
then he or they that shall make default on that behalfe 
shall satisfie & paye for a fine by way of deduccon out of his 
stocke adventured in the laste viadge fyue tymes the value of 
forfecture of fyue the Contribucon by him payable by vertue of this 
Act. The same to be ymployed to the ffull 
furnishinge of the said discou r y. And yf there remaine an 
ou r plus to the vse of the Adventure 1 " 8 in this intended voyadge 
pporcionably according to their seu r all Adventures. 

ITT IS alsoe ordered and decreed by the gen r all Consent 

of this Co r te concerninge the generall trade of 

Aduenturo" to be this Societie and the p r paracon of all voyadgf , 

chardged for not J f. 

bringing in moneys Contributions, and generall adventures of this 

of the daies lymitted 

ffellowshipp heereafter to be sett forth That yf 
any daies or tymes be lymitted and appointed by order of anie 
gen r all Courte for the bringing in of of any contribucons, adven- 
tures or supplies and that default be made in the pformeinge of 
those paying contribucons and supplies att the daies lymitted, 
by any of the Adventurers or Contributors of such voyage that 
the stockes or adventures of such Contributors shall be taxed 
and chardged to aunsweare to the comon Treasure or vse of this 
socyetie such damagf chardgf & Allowaunces for not pforme- 
inge of such paying att the daies lymitted as the Audito rs of the 
Companie for the tyme being appointed to audite the gen r all 
accomptf shall finde to be equall, and that the Gou r no r deputie 
& Comitties, or the most of them shall censure to be fitt to be 
paied w th out any abatem*. 

IT YS alsoe ordered & agreed by like gen r all consent of this 
forfetures for de- Societie That yf any brother of this Companie 
fat U e lto coSng nce S shall be sumoned or warned by the Officer of this 

ffellowshipp thereto appointed, to appeare att 
any gen r all Courte of this Societie, or att any other meeting of 
m r Gou r no r his Deputie, & the Comitties, & the said summons 
or warninge geaven to the ptie him selfe, or left att his howse : 
yf then such pson shall make defaulte, & not appeare att all 
or not appeare att the hower assigned, he shall forfect for eu r y 

M 



162 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

default of non apparaunce I2 d , & for eu r y default of comeing late 
6 d . vnlesse he can giue a sufficient reason of his absence or or late 
comeinge, & the same to be allowed by the gen'all consent of the 
Assemblie or the more pte of them present, either att a gen r all 
Courte or meeteinge of Comitties 

FFOR the better and more orderlie pceedinge in the 
deliberacon of matters propounded in gen r all 

ctnre for often 

eing^o matters Courtf eyther for the establishing of any Actf 
or Ordenancf , or in any other matters concern- 
ing the Companie. It is ordered, that yt shall not be lawfull 
for any brother of this Companie to speake to any one matter 
ppounded aboue three sundrie tymes, vpon peyne of fforfecture 
[of] iij 3 iiij d for eu r y such excesse in speache. 

YT IS alsoe ordered by late Consent of a gen r all Courte that 
yf any brother of this Companie shall in any con- 

agaynst vnciuill & J ^ J ' J 

intemperate speaches tencon or Argument houlden w th any other pson 

or behauiour. 

either in gen r all Courte or meeting of Comitties 
vse any vncivill, or intemperate speaches or behavio r & soe cen- 
sured by the gen r all Courte, or the psons assembled in Comittie, 
he shall forfeict for eu r y such Offence x s . 

AND for the avoydeinge of Confusion of speach or discourse 
Against confusion of m tne deliberacon of matters to be handled in any 
fr a deiiberacr ur of gen r all Courte or meeteinge of Comitties concern- 
inge the Affaires of the Companie. It is ordered 
that noe brother of this ffellowshipp shall interrupt any other in 
his declaracon or discourse of any matter declared or discoursed 
to the Companie nor duringe such declaracon or discourse hould 
pvooke Whisperinge, speach or talke w th any other to the disturb- 
aunce of him that speaketh. But yf he be disposed to aunsweare 
or reply to the speaches ppounded, then to direct his aunsweare 
or reply to m r Gou r no r or his deputie vpon peine of fforfecture of 
ij s vj d for euery such Offence. 

IT YS alsoe ordered for the pacificacon of contencon in 
Against lowde and argum* in gen r all Courtf and other meeting?, 
and of lowde or confused speaches, that when 
m r Gou r no r or his deputie comaundeth scilence by the strooke 
of the Hammer, that then eu r y pson keepe scilence vpon peine 
of forfecture of vj d for euery Offence. 

AND yt ys alsoe ordered that yf any brother of this ffellow- 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 163 

sni PP sna11 vppon comaundm* or demaund of 
m r Gou r no r or his Deputie refuse to pay such 
fynes, or fforfetures as he shall haue fallen into by the breach of 
any of the ordenaunces, or Act of this fellowship or doe not pay 
them beinge required that then such pson shall be Comitted to 
prizon, theare to remayne duringe the pleasure of the Generalise. 
AND yt is furder ordered that yf any brother of this Societie 
Agaynst departure sha11 att an Y gen'all Courte or mectinge of Comit- 
outof yccourte. t j es fe^ out o f ^ Courte or meetinge before 

the Courte shall breake vpp or the busines be ended, except yt 
be by lycence asked of m r Gou r no r or Deputie, and by their 
lycence graunted that he shall forfeite for eu r y default, depteing 
w th out lycence xij d . 

AND yt is lastlie ordered that all fynes and forfectures for- 
feted and lost by any brother of this ffellowshipp 

All forfetures to be .,.,,/ , . _ 

P aide and geaven to by the breache oi any ordenance now heretofore, 

the generall and , r . j i n i r> 

comon use of this or heereaiter to be made shame paied & geaven 
to the gen r all & comon vse of this Societie, & 
to be ymployed to the beareinge of the comon chardgf of the 
same, & to the releefe of the poore, to dispose accordinge to 
order from tyme to tyme to be geaven in that behalfe. 



A PRIUILEDGE 1 for xv teene yeares graunted by 
her ma tie to certeine Aduenturors for the discou r y of 
the trade for the East Indies. 




by the grace of God Queene of England 
ffraunce and Ireland defender of the faith &c : to 
all o r Officers mynisters and subiectf , and to all other 
people aswell w th in this o r Realme of England as 
elswheare vnder o r obedience and lurisdiccon or otherwyse vnto 
whom theis o r ires Pattentf shalbe seene shewed or read 

1 This is the famous first Charter of the Company, granted by Queen Elizabeth 
on the last day of the sixteenth century. In the absence of the original (of the fate 
of which nothing is known) the above is the oldest and most authoritative version in 
the India Office collection. There is another manuscript copy among the " Parch- 
ment Records " (No. 2), but it is of later date, and, so far as can be judged, of inferior 

M I 



!6 4 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

greetinge, wheareas o r most deare and loueing Cozen George 
Earle of Cumberland, & o r welbeloued subiectf S r lohn Harte 
of London knight, S r lohn Spencer of London knight S r Edward 
Michelborne knight Wiftm Cavendish Esquier, Paule Banninge, 
Robt Lee, Leonard Hollyday, lohn Wattf 1 lohn more 2 Edward 
Holmeden Robt Hampson Thomas Smyth & Thomas Cambell 
Cittizens and Aid: of London. Edward Barker Esquier, Thomas 
Marshe Esquier, Samuell Backhowse Esq, lames Lancaster 
Richard Stag Thomas Cordall, Wiftm Garway Oliu r Style, 
Wiftm Quarles Bartholomew Barnes Wiftm Offley Robt Cham- 
berlyn, lohn Harby 3 Richard Wyseman Wiftm Stone ffrancis 
Chery, 4 Tho: Allabaster, Richard Barrett, lohn Swinarton the 
younger Tho: Garway Wiftm Romeny, lames Deane, 5 lohn 
Eldred, 6 Andrew Baninge, Edward Leanynge, Thomas laxon, 7 
Nicfiis Leate, lohn Wolstenholme, Nicholas Peard, Wiftm 
Chamber, Rowland Backhowse, Humfrey Smyth Robt Sandie, 
Henrie Robinson, Richard Pointell, lohn Highlord, Wiftm 
Harryson, Humfrey Style, Humfrey Robinson, Nicfiis fferro r 
Thomas ffarrington lohn Combe, Robt Offley, Roger How, lohn 
Hewet, lames Turno r , Morrice Abbott, 8 Robt Carill, Robt 

accuracy. As, however, it is evidently taken from an independent source, the two 
have been carefully compared, and the differences noted, where at all important. 
Besides these, there is a very early copy, in excellent preservation, in vol. 306 of the 
Harleian MSS. in the British Museum ; this also has been collated with the present 
text, and all variations (except where the difference is merely one of spelling) have 
been recorded in the footnotes. Finally, the version printed by Purchas has been con- 
sulted in cases where the others disagree ; and thus, it is hoped, the materials for a 
fairly reliable text of this most important document have been obtained and placed 
on record. 

1 Afterwards Sir John Watts, Sheriff in 1596-97, and Mayor in 1606-7. He was 
governor of the Company from nth April, 1601, to 6th July, 1602. 

2 Moore (Harl. MS.). 4 Cherie (Harl. MS.) ; Cherry (Purchas). 

3 Haruy (Purchas and Parch. Rec.) 5 Beane (Parch. Rec.) 

6 Whilom (1583) a pioneer of trade in the East, in company with Fitch and 
Newbery, though he did not himself go farther than Bassora ; now "a graue, rich 
and principall Citizen " (Purchas). He was a large subscriber to the early voyages of 
the Company, and one of the first committees (see page 169). 

7 luxon (Harl. MS. and Parch. Rec.) ; Jackson (Purchas). 

8 Maurice Abbott, brother of George, Archbishop of Canterbury, and of Robert, 
Bishop of Salisbury. In 1615 he visited the East Indies; and on his return was 
made deputy governor of the Company, to which post he was re-elected 8 times. He 
was one of those appointed to treat with the Dutch Commissioners in London in 
1619, and in the following year was sent, with Sir Dudley Digges, on a special 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 165 

Brooke Richard Chamfelyn George Chamfclen, Leonard White, 
lohn Cornelius, Raphe Busbie, 1 Wiftm lennyngf, Gyles Paslowe 
Rofet Bell, Thomas Whyte, Nictiis Lynge, Wiftm Palmer, Ellis 
Grippes, George Bowles 2 Nictiis Crispe 3 lohn Merricke Humfrey 
Hanford, Thomas Symondf, Robert Coxe, Wiftm Wastall, 4 lohn 
Humfrey, Thomas Bostocke, Bartholomew Holland, Richard 
Cockes, Wiftm Walton, Wiftm ffreeman, Thomas Southacke, 
lohn ffryre, ffrancis Dent, Richard Ball, 5 Richard Pearce, Roger 
Heminge, 6 Rofot Cobbe Robert Robinson, ffrauncis Evington, 
ffrancis Taylo r , Thomas Westwray, 7 lohn Middleton Rofet Gore 
Raphe Gore, Wiftm Cater, George Cater, lohn Busbridge, 
Thomas Horton, Wiftm Bond, 8 Wiftm Cotton, lohn, Stockley, 
Roger Ofield, Augustyne Skinner, Richard Wiche 9 Robert 
Towerson, Richard Talby, Robt Middleton, Rofot Bateman, 
Richard Gosson, Rofet Waldoe Richard Wragge, lohn Wragge 
Wiftm Dale, Lawrence Waldoe, 10 Henrie Bridgman, Samuell 
Armitage, Edward Harrison, Edmond 11 Nicholsonn, Clement 
Moseley, lohn Newman, Humfrey Wallcott 13 Thomas Richardson, 
Thomas Boothby, lohn Cowchman, 13 Reynold .Greene, Richard 
Burret, 14 Robert Mildmay, Wiftm Hinde, George Chandlo r , 
Edward Lutterford, Wiftm Burret, 15 Stephen Harvy, Thomas 
Henshawe Wiftm fferris, Wiftm Aldersey, Wiftm Hewett, Wiftm 
ffysher, losephe Salbucke, Nicfcis Manley Nictiis Salter Wylliam 
Willaston, Wiftm Angell, Nicholas Barnestey, 16 lohn Hawkins 
Roger Dye, Richard Clarke, Thomas Hewett, George Whitmore, 

embassy to Holland on the same business. He became governor of the Company in 
March, 1624, and held that post until some time in 1638 or 1639, the period of his 
mayoralty. He was a member of parliament for several years, and spoke often in 
defence of the Company. He was knighted on the accession of Charles I., who, some 
14 years later, made him " king's lieutenant " of London and suburbs during his 
Majesty's absence in the expedition against the Scots. He died loth Jan., 1641/2. 
1 Basby (Purchas). 3 Bolles (Harl. MS.). 

3 Purchas omits both this and the preceding name. 

4 Walstall (Parch. Rec.) ; Wustall (Purchas). 5 Bull (Purchas). 

6 Henyng (Purchas). 

7 Westrow (Purchas) ; Westrowe (Parch. Rec.). 

8 Purchas and Parch. Rec. add " Merchant Tayler of London." 

9 Wise (Purchas). Edward (Purchas). 13 Coachman (Purchas). 
10 Waldore (Purchas). 12 Wallott (Purchas). 14 Barret (Harl. MS.). 
15 Barret (Harl. MS.) ; Burrell (Purchas and Parch. Rec.). 

18 Barnesly (Harl. MS. and Purchas) ; Barnesley (Parch. Rec.). 



166 FIRST LETTER BOOK OP 

Henry Polsteed, 1 Wiftm Greenwell, Roftt Johnson, Barth: 
Haggett 2 Humfrey Basse, Roftt Bucke, Ambrose Wheeler, Wiftm 
Hale Richard Hale 3 Iunio r , lohn Hodgson, Alphonsus ffowle, 4 
Edmond Spencer, Rofet Ducie, 5 Richard Pyott, Wiftm Bonham, 
Edward Barkam, George Coles, 6 Raphe Hamo r , lames Culli- 
more, 7 Samuell Hare, George vtley, Gregorie 

George Vtleydisf ran- J ' 

chued the 6th O f Allen, Henry Archer, leoffrey Kirby, lohn Cason, 
Richard Beale, Thomas Shipton, lohn ffletcher 
Thomas Talbott, Rofct Pennyngton, Humfrey Milward, Richard 
Hearne, Raphe Allen, lohn Brooke, Anthonie Gibson, Rofct 
Kayes, Hugh Crompton Richard Washer, George Holman Morrice 
Lewellen, Richard Persons, ffrancis Barker, Wiftm Turno r , lohn 
Greenwood, Richard Deane, Richard Ironside, George Smythes, 
lames Dunkin, Edward Walter, Andrew Chamblyn, Robt Strat- 
forde 9 Wiftm Millett, Symon Lawrence, Thomas Lydall Stephen 
Hodgson, Richard Wright, 10 Wiftm Starkey, Wiftm Smyth, lohn 
Ellacott Robert Bayly & Roger Cotton haue of o r c r teine know- 
ledge beene petitioners vnto vs for o r Royall assent and lycence to 
be graunted vnto them, that they of 11 their owne Adventures 
Costf & chardges aswell for the Hono r of this our Realme of 
England as for the increase of o r Navigacon and advauncem* of 

1 Polstee (Purchas). 4 Foote (Purchas). 6 Colles (Harl. MS.). 

2 Huggott (Purchas). ~ Dewsy (Harl. MS.). 7 Colymer (Purchas). 

3 Hull (Purchas). 

8 For non-payment of his adventure (see Court Minutes of that date). Curiously 
enough the marginal entry occurs in all four texts ; possibly it had been noted on 
the original charter. 

9 Ant. Stratford should follow this name (Harl. MS., Parch. Rec. and Purchas). 

10 Richard Wright was the first secretary of the Company, mention being made 
of him in that capacity on the 8th Oct., 1600, and he was still secretary in July, 1602. 
The loss of the second Court Book prevents us from saying how long he held this 
post, but there is reason to think that it could not have been to a later date than 
July, 1606. In 1615 he married the widow of John Stockley, who had been also a 
freeman of the Company, and a committee in 1608-10. Mrs. Stockley seems to have 
been a woman of some wealth, for at her husband's funeral the governor, deputy 
and committees were invited to dinner (Court Minutes, agth Jan., 1614), and in the 
same year she adventured 1200 in the Company's stock (Ibid., iSth Feb., 1614). 
On isth May, 1618, " Lyonell, son of Richard Wright, of Walthamstow," was admitted 
to the freedom of the Company, and as the admission was by patrimony, this entry 
probably relates to a son of the whilom secretary. 

11 At (Harl. MS. and Purchas}. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 167 

trade of merchandize, w th in o r said Realmes and the dominions of 
the same might Adventure and sett forth one or more voyage w ttl 
Convenient number of shipps and Pynnasses by way of traffique 
& m r chandize to the East Indies in the Countries and parte of 
Asia and Affrica & to as many of the Ilandf Portf Citties Townes 
and places theareaboute, as where trade and traffique of m r chaun- 
dize may by all liklihood be discou r ed established or had. Diuers 
of w ch Countries & many of the Ilandf Citties and portf thereof, 
haue longe sithence beene discou r ed, by others of o r subiectf : 
albeit not frequented in trade of m r chandize. KNOWE yee 
therefore that we greatelie tendringe the Hono 1 ' of o r Nacon, the 
wealth of o 1 ' people, and the encourradgment of them and others 
of o 1 ' loueing SubiectC in their good enterprises for the encrease 
of o r Navigacon and the advauncem* of lawfull traffique to the 
benefict of o r Comonweale haue of o 1 ' speciall grace c r teine know- 
ledge and meere mocon geven and graunted, and by theis p r sent 
for vs o 1 ' heires and Successo 1 ' 3 doe giue and graunte to o rl loueinge 
subiectf before in theis presentf expreslie named. THAT they 
and eu r y of them from henceforth be and shall be 

a bodie politick ...,.,, ... 

abody Corporate & politicke in deede and in 
name by the name of the Gou r no r and Companie of m r chauntf of 
the style of the cor- London tradinge into the East Indies, & them by 

the name of the Gou r no r and Companie of 
m r chauntf of London tradinge into the East Indies one body 
Corporate & polliticke in deede & in name reallie, and fullie for vs 
o r heires and successo 1 ' 3 we doe erect make ordeine constitute 
establish and declare by theis presentf . And that by the same name 
of Gou r no v & Companie of m r chauntf of London trading into the 
East Indies they shall haue succession, and that they and their 
Successo rs by the name of the Gou r no r & Companie of m r chaunt 
of London tradinge into the East Indies be & shall be at all 
tymes heereafter ;psons able & capable in Lawe and a body 
corporate and polli[ti]cke & capable in lawe to haue, purchase, 
receiue, possesse, enioy & reteine landf , tentf , 3 priveledgf , liber- 
ties, lurissdiccons, franchises, & hereditam*^ of whatsoeu 1 ' kinde, 



1 The other three texts insert " said." 

2 Rents (Parch. Rec.) an obvious blunder. 



i68 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

nature, and qualitie soeu r they be, to them and their Successo rd 
And alsoe to giue, graunte, 1 alien, assigne, and dispose landf, 
Tentf, and hereditament^, and to doe & execute all and singuler 
other thingf by the same name, that to them shall or may apper- 
teyne to doe. AND that they and their Successo rs by the name 
of the the Gou r no r & Comp: of m r chaunte of Londondon tradinge 
into the East Indies may plead & be ympleaded aunsweare and 
be aunsweared defend & be defended in whatsoeu 1 ' Courtf & 
places and before whatsoeu 1 ludgf and Justices and other psons & 
officers in all and singuler accons pleas suitf quarrells causes and 
demaundf whatsoeu r of whatsoeu r kinde nature or sorte in such 
manner and forme as other o r Leidg people of this o r Realme of 
England beinge psons able & capable in lawe, may or can haue 
purchase receiue possesse enioye reteyne, giue graunte, demyse 
alien assigne dispose plead & be ympleaded, aunsweare & be 
aunsweared defend & be defended release & be released doe pmitt 
& execute And that the said Gou r no r and Companie of m r chaunte 
of London trading into the East Indies and their 

A Comon scale. . , - 

successo" may haue a comon scale to serue for 
all the Causes and busynes of them and their successo". AND 
that yt shall & may be lawfull to the said Gou r no r & Companie & 
their successo rs the same scale from tyme to tyme att their will 
and pleasuer to breake chandge & to make new or alter as to 
them shall seeme expedient. 

AND further we will and by theis present^ for vs o r heires 
The office of the anc ^ successo 1 " 8 we doe ordeinc that there shall 

be from henceforth one of the same Companie 
elected and appointed in such forme as heereafter in theis present f 
is expressed w dl shall be called the Gou r nor of the said Company, 
and that there shall be from hencforth Twenty ifower of the said 
Companie elected & appointed in such forme as heereafter in theis 
present^ is expressed, w ch shalbe called the Comitties of the said 
Company 2 for the tyme beinge shall haue the direccon of the 
voyage of or for the said Company and the pvision of the 
shippinge and m r chaundizes thereto belongeinge, and alsoe the 

1 Insert "demise" (Harl. MS. and Purchas). 

2 Purchas and Parch. Rec. add here " who together with y Gov r of y c said Comp a ."; 
but the Harl. MS. agrees with the text as it stands. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 169 

sale of all m r chaundizes retourned in the voyagf , of or for the said 
Companie, and the manageing and handling of all other thingf 
belongeing to the said Company, and for the better execution of 
this o r will and gratmte in this behalfe, We haue assigned, 
nominated, constituted and made, & by theis present^ for vs o r 
Thomas smyth Aider: heires and sucesso" we doe assigne nominate 

constitute and make the said Thomas Smyth Aid: 
of London to be the first & present Gou r no r of the said Company 
to continue in the said office from the date of theis present^ vntill 
an other of the said Companie shall in due manner be chosen 
and sworne vnto the said Office accordinge to the ordenances and 
pvision heereafter in theis present^ expressed and declared yf the 
said Thomas Smyth shall soe longe lyue, And alsoe we haue 
assigned nominated and appointed and by theis present^ for vs & 
o r heires and successo 13 Wee doe assigne nominate constitute & 
make the said Paule Bannynge Leonard Holliday, lohn Moore, 
Edward Holmeden, Richard Stap Thomas Cordell, Wiftm 
Garway, Olyuer Style, lames Lancaster, 1 Richard Wyseman, 
ffrancis Chery, Thomas Allabaster, Wittm Romeny, Roger Howe, 
Wiftm Chambers, Robt Sandy, lohn Eldred, Richard Witche, 
lohn Highlord, lohn Middleton, lohn Combe, Wiftm Harrison, 
Nicfiis Lynge, and Rofet Bell to be the Twentie ffbwer first and 

present Comitties of the said Company to Con- 

the first Committies . . , i/-\/v> r/~ ri i 

for the dircccon of tmuc in the said Omce ot Comitties of the said 

the affaires of the r i i r i r 

company being xxiiij Company from the date of theis presentf for one 

in Nomber i_ 11 . 

wholle yeare next nollowmg 

AND furder we will and graunte by theis presentf for vs o r 
heires and successo rs vnto the said Gou r no r and Companie of 
m r chauntf of London tradinge into the East Indies and their 
successo rs that yt shall and may be lawfull to and for the said 
Gou r no r and Comp : for the tyme beinge or the more parte of 
them present at any publick assembly Comonly called the Courte 
houlden for the said Company, The Gou r no r of the said Com- 
pany being alwaies one from tyme to tyme, to elect nominate & 
A depe to the G OU r- appointe one of the said Company to be Deputie 
before f m^X to the said Gou r no r w ch Deputie shall take a 

corporall Oath before the Gou r no r and ffyue or 
more of the Comitties of the said Companie for the tyme being 
Lanchaster (Harl MS.). 



j 7 o FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

well faithfullie and trulie to execute his said Office of Deputie to 
the Gou r no r of the said Company, and after his Oath soe taken 
shall & may from tyme to tyme in the Absence of the said 
Gou r no r exercyse and execute the Office of Gou r no r of the said 
Company in such sorte as the Gou r no r ought to doe. 

AND further we will & graunte by theis present^ for vs our 
The first day of j heires and successo" vnto the said Gou r no r & 



Companie of m r chauntf of London tradinge into 
of the Gournor. the East j^ies & ^eir successo rs , that they or 
the greater pte of them, whereof the Gou r no r for the tyme being 
or his Deputie to be one from tyme to tyme & at altymes heere- 
after shall and may haue aucthoritie and power yearelie & eu r y 
yeare on the first day of lulie, or at any tyme w th in 6 daies after 
that day to assemble and meete together in some Convenient 
place to be appointed from tyme to tyme by the Gou r no r or in his 
absence by the Deputie of the said Gou r no r for the tyme being. 
And that they being soe assembled yt shall & may be lawfull to 
and for the said Gou r no r or Deputie of the said Gou r no r and the 
said Comp : for the tyme beinge or the greater pte of them, w ch 
then shall happen to be present whereof the Gou r no r of the saide 
Companie to be one, 1 or his deputie for the tyme being, to elect 
and nominate one of the said Companie, w ch shall be Gou r no r of 
the said Company for one wholle yeare from thence next follow- 
inge : w ch pson being soe elected and nominated to be Gou r no r of 
y e said Comp : as is aforesaid before he be admitted to the 
execucon of the said Office shall take a corporall Oath before the 
last Gou r no r being his predicesso r , or his deputie, & any sixe or 
more of the Comitties of the said Company for the tyme beinge, 
that he shall from tyme to tyme well and trulie execute the Office 
of Gou r no r of the said Company in all things concerninge the 
same, & that imediatelie after the Oath soe taken he shall and 
may execute and vse the said Office of Gou r no r of the said 
Companie for one whole yeare from thence next ffollowinge, 
eury brother to take And in like manner 2 we will and graunte that 
a corporaii oath aswell eu r y one aboue named to be of the said 
Companie, or ffellowshippe as al others heereafter to be admitted, 

1 Purchas and Parch. Rec. transfer " to be one" to the end of the clause, after the 
word " being," but the Harl, MS. agrees with the text. 

2 Sorte (Harl. MS.) ; sort (Purchas and Parch. Rec.). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 171 

or free of the said Companie shall take a corporall oath before the 
Gou r no r of this said Company or his Deputie for the tyme being 
being to such effect as by the said 1 Gou r no r & Comp : or more 
pte of them In any publicke Courte to be held for the said 
Company shall be in reasonable manner sett downe & devised 
before they shall be allowed or admitted to trade or traffique as a 
ffreeman of the said Company. 

AND further we will & graunte by theis presentf for vs o r 
heires and successo 1 ' 3 vnto the said Gou r no r & 

xxiiijComittiestobe r ,. i r T 1 t* j 

yeareiie elected on Companie of m r cnauntf oi London trading into 

the first of Julie or . . 

wthjn 6 dales ffoiiow- the East Indies & their successo rs that the said 

inge. 

Gou r no r , or the Deputie of the said Gou r no r and 
the Comp : and their successo r3 for the tyme beinge or the greater 
parte of them whereof the gou r no r or the Deputie of the Gou r no r 
from tyme to tyme to be one, shall & may from tyme to tyme 
and att altymes heereafter haue authoritie and power yeareiie 
& eu r y yeare on the first day of luly, or att any tyme w th in sixe 
daies after that day to assemble & meete together in some 
convenient place to be from tyme to tyme appointed by the said 
Gou r no r of the said Company, or in his absence by his Deputie 
And that they being soe assembled yt shall &may be lawfull to & 
for the said Gou r no r or his Deputie & the Company for the tyme 
being, or the greater pte of them w ch then shall happen to be 
p r sent whereof the Gou r no r of the said Companie or his Deputie 
for the tyme being to be one to elect & nominate Twentie ffower 
of the said Comp: w ch shall be Comitties of the said Company 
for one whole yeare from thence next ensueinge, w ch psons being 
soe elected & nominated to be Comitties of the said Companie 
as aforesaid before they be admitted to the execucon of their said 
The Comitties shaii Offices shall take a Corporall Oath before the 

Gou'W or his Deputie & any 6 or more of the 
said Comitties of the said Company being their last predicesso" 
for the tyme beinge that they eu r y of them shall well & 
faithfullie pforme their said Office of Comitties in all thingf 
concerning the same. And that ymediatelie after the 3 Oath soe 



1 Not in Harl. MS. 

2 Parch. Rec. and Purchas interpolate "said," but the Harl. MS. agrees with the 



text. 



i 7 2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OP 

taken they shall & may execute and vse their said Offices of 
Comitties of the said Companie for one whole 

yf the Gourno' die, c - , . . 

or be remoued a new yeare from thence next cnsuemge. 1 And moreou r 
o r will & pleasuer is and by theis present^ for vs 
o r heires and successo rs we doe graunt vnto the said Gou r no r & 
Company of m r chaunt of London tradinge into the East Indies, 
& to their successo that when and as often as yt shall happen 
the Gou r no r of the said Company for the tyme beinge att any 
tyme w th in one yeare after that he shall be nominated elected 
& sworne to the Office of the Gou r no r of the said Companie as is 
aforesaid to die or to be remoued from the said Office, w ch Gou r no r 
not demeaneinge him selfe well in his said Office, we will to be 
remoueable att the pleasure of the said Company, or the greater 
pte of them, w ch shall be present at any their publike Assemblies, 
comonly called their 3 gen r all Courte houlden for the said Com- 
pany. That then & soe often yt shall & may be lawfull to & for 
the residue of the said Company for the tyme being, or the 
greater pte of them, w th in convenient tyme after the death or 
remoueinge any such Gou r no r to assemble themselues in such 
convenient place as they shall thinke ffitt, for the eleccon of the 
Gou r no r of the said Companie, and that the said Company, or 
the greater parte of them being then and there present shall and 
may then & theare before their depture from the said place elect 
& nominate one other of the said Companie to be Gou r no r of the 
said Company in the place or steede of him that soe died or 
was soe remoued w ch pson beinge soe elected & nominated to the 
office of Gou r no r of the said Company shall haue and exercise 
the said office for & during the residue of the said yeare takeing 
first a corporall Oath as is aforesaid for the due execucon thereof, 
and this to be done from tyme to tyme soe often as the case shall 
soe requier. 

AND alsoe o r will and pleasure is and by theis present^ for 

if any of the Com- vs Q * hd re s and successo rs we doe graunte vnto 

moued d a newVb'e" the said Gou r no r & Company of m r chaunte of 

London trading into the East Indies and to their 

successo" that when and as often as yt shall happen any of the 

1 Followinge (Harl. MS., Parch. Rec. and Purchas). 
3 The (Harl MS.). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 173 

said l Comitties of the said Company for the tyme being at any 
time w tll in one yeare next after that they or any of them shalbe 
nomynated 3 & sworne to the Office of Comitties of the said 
Company (as is aforesaid) to die or be remoued from the said 
office, w dl Comitties not demeaneinge them selues well in the 
said Office we will to be remoueable att the pleasuer of the said 
Gou r no r & Company or the greater pte of them whereof the 
Gou r no r of the said Company for the tyme being or his dep tie for 
the tyme being to be one. That then and soe often yt shall & 
may be lawfull to & for the said Gou r no r and Company for the 
tyme beinge or the greater pte of them, whereof the gou r no r 3 or 
his Deputie to be one w th in Convenient tyme after the death or 
remoueinge of any of the said Comitties to assemble themselues 
in such convenient place as is or shall be vsuall or accustomed for 
the eleccon of the Gou r no r of the said Companie, or whereells the 
Gou r no r of the said Companie for the tyme being or his deputie 
shall appointe and that the said Gou r no r & Companie or the 
greater pte of them, whereof the Gou r no r for the tyme being, or 
his deputie to be one being then and theare present shall & may 
then and theare before their depture from the said place elect & 
nominate one or more of the said Companie to be Comitties of 
the said Company in the places and steedf , place or steede of 
him or them that soe dyed or were or was soe remoued, w ch pson 
or psons soe elected 4 to the office or offices of Comittee or 
Comittees of the said Company shall haue & exercyse the said 
Office and Officees for and during the residue of the said yeare 
takeinge first a corporall Oath, as is aforesaid for the due 
execucon thereof and this to be done frome tyme to tyme soe 
often as the case shall requier. 

AND ffurther we doe by theis p r sentf for vs o r heires and 
successo 1 ' 3 will and graunte vnto the said Gou r no r & Company of 
m r chaunt^ of London trading into the East Indies & their 
successo 1 ' 3 that they and all that are or shall be of the said 
Companie of m r chaunt of London trading into the East Indies 

1 Not in the other three texts. 2 The other three texts add " elected." 

3 Parch. Rec. and Purchas add " for the time being." Harl, MS. agrees with the 
text. 

4 The other three texts add "and nominated." 



74 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

& eu'y of them and all the sonns of them, & eu'y of them att their 
seu'all ages of Twentie one yeares or vpwardes. And farther all 
such the apprentices ffacto" or servauntf of them and eu'y of 
them, w* heereafter shall be ymployed by the said Gou'no' & 
Comp : in the said trade of m'chandize of or to the East Indies 
xsyond the Seas or any other the places aforesaid in any nte of the 
aid East Indies shall and may by the space of xv' yeares from 
the feast of the birth of o' Lord God last past before the date 
lereof ffreehe traffick & vse the trade of m'chandize by Seas in & 
by such waies and passages already found out and discou'ed and ' 
W heereafter shall be found out and discou'ed as they shall 
esteeme and take to be fittest into and from the said East Indies 
into the Countries and ptf of Asia & Affrica and into & from all 
the Ilandf portf Havens Citties Creekf Townes & places of Asia 
Africa & America or any of them beyond the Cape of Bona 
B-speransa to the straightf of Magalan where any trade or 
fique of m'chaundize may be vsed and ' had and to & from 
iu'y of them in such order manner forme libertie and Condicon to 
all entente & purposes as shall be from tyme to tyme at any 
pubhque assemblie or Courte held by or for the said Gou'no' or 
Companie, by or betweene them of the said Company of ffellow- 
shipp of m'chauntf of London trading into the East Indies or 
the more pte of them for the tyme being present at such 
assemblie or Courte The Gou'no' or his Deputie being alwaies 
present att such Courte or Assemblie lymitted and agreed and 
not otherwyse w"'out any molestacon impeachm' or disturbance 
any statute vsage diu'sitie religion or faith or any other cause or 
matter whatsoeu" to the Contrarie notw'"standinge ; soe 
alwaies the same trade be 2 vndertaken nor addressed to 
any Country, Hand, porte, Haven Cittie Creeke Towne or 
place alreadie in the lawful! and actuall possession of any such 
Anstian Pnnce or state as att this present is or at any tyme 
heereafter shalbe in league or amity w'" vs o- heires or successo 
and who doth not or will not accept of such trade but doth ou'lie 

same to be vtterlie 



The other three texts read "or." 

Be not (Harl. MS., Parch. Kec. and Purchas). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 175 

AND further o r will & pleasuer is, and by theis presentf for vs 

o r heires and successo 1 ' 8 we doe graunte vnto the 

assembfeinanyccm^ said Gou r no r & Company of m r chaunt of London 

venient place. ... . , . L TJ- jj ^i 

trading into the East Indies and to their suc- 
cesso 1 ' 8 , that yt shall & may be lawfull to and for the said 
Gou r no r & Company of nV'chauntf of London tradinge into the 
East Indies & their successo rs from tyme to tyme to assemble 
themselues for or aboute any the matters causes affaires or 
busines of the said trade in any place or places for the same 
convenient during the said terme of mfteene yeares w th in o r 
dominions or elswheare, & there to hold Courte for the said 
Companie and the affaires thereof, & that alsoe yt shall & may be 
lawfull to for them or the more pte of them being soe 
assembled, & that shall then & theare be present in any such 
Authentic to make place or places whereof the Gou r no r or his deputie 
SeS-SSt'p^of^ for tlie ty 1116 bein g to be one > to make, ordeine & 

constitute such and soe many reasonable lawes 
constitucons, orders & ordenances as to them or the greater .pte 
of them being then and theare present shall seeme necessarie and 
convenient for the good gou'ntri* of the same Companie & of all 
ffacto m rs Mariners & other Officers ymployed 1 in any of their 
voyagf, and for the better advauncement & continuance of the 
said trade and traffique, and the same lawes constitucons orders 
and ordenaunces as by them or the greater pte of them shall be 
thought necessarie being 3 soe made to putt in vse, & execucon 
accordinglie, & at their pleasuer to revoke or alter the same, or 
any of them, as occasion shall requier and that the said Gou r no r 
& Companie soe often as they shall make ordeine or establish any 
such lawes constitucons orders & ordenances in forme aforesaid 
TO punish offenders sha11 & ma y lawfullie ympose, ordeine lymitt & 
purs" soe b S y th e r P uide such peines punishmentf and Penalties by 
t S oT.?e b ia n wes o n f tr ?he ymprisonm* of bodie, or by fynes or 3 amercementf , 

or by all or any of them vpon & against all 
Offenders contrary to such lawes Constitucons orders and orden- 

1 The other three texts add " or to be imployed." 

2 Parch. Rec. and Purchas omit "as being." Harl, MS. agrees with the 

text. 

3 And (Harl. MS., Parch. Rec, and Purchas). 



i 7 6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

ances or any of them as to the said Gou r no r & Companie for the 
tyme being, or the greater pte of them then & there being present 
the said Gou r no r or his Deputie being alwaies one shall seeme 
necessary requisite and Convenient for the observacon of the 
same lawes constitucons orders and ordenances, & the same 
fynes, & amercem^, shall and may levy fyne take & haue to the 
vse of the said Gou r no r and Companie & their successo w th out 
the ympedim* of vs o r heires or successo or of any the Officers 
or mynisters of vs o r heires or l successo r8 , or w th out any accompt 
to vs o r heires or successo rs to be rendred or made. All & 
singuler w ch lawes, constitucons, orders, and ordenances soe as 
aforesayd to be made we will to be dulie observed and kept vnder 
the peines and penalties therein to be conteyned : Soe alwaies the 
said lawes Constitucons orders ordenancf ymprisonm^ fynes and 
amercem^ be reasonable & not contrary or repugnant to the 
lawes statutes or Customes of this o r Realme 

AND forasmuch as the said Gou r no r & Company of m r chauntf 
of London trading into the East Indies haue not 

ffreedome of Custome . - ., c /". 

of goodes outwardes yet experience of the kmdf of Comodities and 
m r chandizes w ch are or will be vendible or to be 
vttered in the said ptf of the East Indies and therefore shall be 
driven to carrie to those pt in their voyadgf dyvers & sundry 
Comodities w cb are likelie to be retourned againe into this o r 
Realme. WEE therefore of our speciall grace certeine know- 
ledge and meere mocon for the better encourageing of the said 
Gou r no r and Companie of m r chaunt of London trading into the 3 
East Indies and for the advauncem* of the said trade doe graunt 
vnto the saide Gou r no r and Company, and to their successo rs that 
they and their successo rs during the fower first voyage w ch they 
shall make or sett forth for or towardes the said East Indies shall 
& may transporte and carrie out of o r Realme of England, & 
the portf Creekf & havens thereof all such and soe much goodf 
& m r chandizes, being goodf and m r chandizes lawfullie passable & 
transportable out of this Realme and not prohibited to be trans- 
ported by any lawe or statute of this Realme as shalbe by them 
their ffacto or assignes shipped in any shipp or shipps vessell or 

1 And (Harl. MS.). 2 Granted ? 

Said (Harl. MS.). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 177 

vessels to be ymployed in any of the said fower first voyage free 
of Custome subsidie or Pondage or any other duties or paym^ to 
vs or o r successo rs due or belonging for the shippinge or trans- 
porting of the same or any of them : And yett neu r thelesse our 
will & pleasure is and we doe by theis present^ straightly chardge 
& Comaund that all & eu r y such goodf & m r chandizes soe to be 
transported out of this Realme from tyme to tyme during the 1 
ffower first voyagf as ys aforesaid shall from tyme to tyme be 
dulie entered by the Customer Comptroller or other officer of 
such porte Creeke or place where the same goodf or m r chaun- 
dizes shall happen to be shipped and laden before such tyme as 
the same shall be shipped or laden to be transported as aforesaid. 
AND alsoe of o r further espetiall grace certeyne knowledg 
6&6monnethestyme and meerc mocon we doe for vs o r heires and 
!LeT"ubsfdie C ?n S : successo rs graunte to & w th the said Gou'no* & 
Company of m r chaunt of London trading into 
the East Indies and their successo rs that when & as often at 
any tyme during the said terme and space of ffyfteene yeares 
as any Custome pondage subsidie or other duties shall be due 
& payable vnto vs o r heires or successo 1 ' 3 for any good? wares 
or m r chandize whatsoeu 1 ' to be retourned out or from any the 
Ilandf & portf Havens Citties Townes or placf aforesaid vnto 
the porte of London or any of the Havens Creekf members 
or places to 3 the said porte belongeing that the Customers and 
all other officers for the tyme being of vs o r heires or successo rs 
for or concerning receiptf of Custome Pondage subsidies or other 
duties vnto whom yt shall apperteyne shall vpon the request of 
the Gou r no r & Company of the said m r chauntf of London trad- 
inge into the East Indies or any their Agentf ffacto rs or assignes 8 
sixe monnethes tyme for the payment of the one halfe, and after 
those sixe monnethes ended other sixe monnethes tyme for the 
payment of the other halfe of their said Custome pondage or 
other subsidie or duties receyueing good & sufficient bond^ w th 
suertie to the vse of vs o r heires & successo 1 ' 3 for the true pay- 

1 The said (Parch. Rec. and Purchas). 

2 Of (Harl. MS.). 

3 Parch. Rec. and Purchas add "give unto the said Gov r and Comp a Their Agents 
ffactors or Assigns." PJarl. MS. agrees with the text. 

N 



I7 8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

ment of the same accordinglie and vpon the receipt of the said 
bondf w th suertie from tyme to tyme to giue vnto the said 
Gou r no r & Comp: of m r chauntf? of London trading into the 
East Indies for the tyme being their Agentf ffacto" or Assignes 
their Cockettf or other warrant^ to take out & receiue on land 
the same goodf? wares & m r chandizes by vertue thereof w tll out 
any disturbaunce. And that alsoe as often as at any tyme duringe 
if goodes miscarry the said terme of ffiftcene 1 yeares any good? 
vain! of tw cuiome wares or marchandizes of the said Gou r no r & 
Shll goodcrafte" Company for the tyme being Laden from o r 
ward shipped porte of Lon d on or any the Creeke members 

or places to 2 the same porte belongeing to be transported to or 
towardf any of the portf Ilandf Havens Citties townes or places 
aforesaid shall happen to miscarrie or be lost before their safe 
arrivall or dischardge in the Portf for and to w dl the same shall 
be sent that then and soe often, soe much Custome pondage 
subsidies or other duties as they aunsweared to vs for the same 
before their goinge forth of o r said portf Havens or Creekf shall 
after due proofe made before the Threr of England for the tyme 
beinge of the said losse and the iust quantitie thereof be by 
vertue hereof allowed by the said Gou r no r and Company their 
Agentf or ffacto 1 ' 8 by warrant of the said Thfer to the said 
Customers or officers in the next goodf wares or nY'chandizes 
that the said Gou r no r & Company or their successo rs shall and 
may shipp for or towardf those places 3 accordinge to the true 
rate of the Customes pondage or subsidies before paid for the 
goodf wares or m r chaundizes soe loste or myscarrying or any 
pte thereof and for y* the' 1 Gou r no r & Company of m r chauntf 
of London tradinge into the East Indies are like to bringe into 
this o r Realme a much greater quantetie of forreine Comodities 
from the partf of the said East Indies then can be spent for the 
necessarie vse of the same o r Realme w ch of necessitie must be 
transported into other Countries and there vented, We for 
vs o r heires and successo" of o r espetiall grace c r teine know- 
ledge & meere mocon doe graunte to and w th the said Gou r no r 

1 Blank in Parch. Rec. 3 Partes (Harl. MS., Parch. Rec. and Purchas}. 

2 In (Harl. MS.). * The said (Parch. Rec, and Purchas). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 179 

at ^ Companie of marchaunte of London trading 



thf. Reatoeft^hl'lbe * nt the EaSt IndieS and tneir SUCCCSSO that at 

Sttwaii s f ubiect an to a11 tymes from tyme to tyme during the space of 
vpr^eTrsfciTs! thirteene monnethes next after the dischardge of 
SnethSf 111 " an Y of tne said forreine Comodities soe to be 
brought in the subsidies pondage Customes & other 
duties for the same being first paied or compounded for as afore 
said, It shall be lawfull for the said Gou r no r & Company and their 
successo rs or any other naturall subiectf of this o r Realme w ch 
may or shall buie the same of them or 1 transporte the same in 
English Bottoms freelie out of this Realme aswell vngarbled as 
garbled w th out paym te of any further Custome, pondage, or 
any further subsidie to vs o v heires or successo" for the same 
whereof the subsidy pondage Customes or other duties shall be 
soe formerlie paid or Compounded for as aforesaid and soe 
prouided 2 and the said Customer or other officer or officers to 
whome yt shall in that behalfe appteine for the tyme being 
by vertue hereof shall vpon due and sufficient prooff thereof 
made in the Customes 3 howse 4 or belonging to the said 5 port of 
London giue them sufficient cockett or certificate, not 6 for the 
safe passinge out therof accordinglie. And to theend noe 
deceipt be vsed therein 7 to vs our heires or successo 1 ' 8 Certifi- 
cate shalbe brought from the Collecto r of the Custome, subsidie, 
pondage, or other duties inwardes of vs our heires or successo rs 
that the said goodf wares or m r chandizes haue w th in the tyme 
lymitted aunsweared their due custome subsidy pondage or 
other duties for the same inwardes vnto the Collecto 1 ' 8 of the 
Custome subsidy pondage or other duties outwardf of vs o r 
heires or successo rs . 9 

AND moreou r we of o r further espetiall grace certeine 

1 The other texts read "to." 

2 Proved (Parch. Rec.). The others agree with the text. 

3 Custome (Harl. MS. and Parch. Rec.). 

4 Parch. Rec. and Purchas add "of." 

5 The other texts read " same." ^ Herein (Parch. Rec. and Purchas). 

6 Omitted in the other three texts. 8 Collectors (Harl. MS.). 

9 In Parch. Rec. and Purchas, this last clause ("vnto ...... successo rs ") is made 

to precede the words "that ....... inwardes." In the Harl. MS., however, the 

arrangement is the same as in the text. 

N I 



l8o FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

That yt shaii be knowledge and meere mocon haue eraunted & 

lawfull in the first , ., . r _ , . o 
voyadge to carry out by theiS present^ for VS O r heiFCS & SUCC6SSO rs 
in forreine coyne pro- 
cured by the Comp : d e graunte vnto the said Gou r no r & Company 

or bullion the value . f J 

of xxx m soe as o f marchauntf of London trading: into the East 

6 ml' thereof be new 

coyned in the mynt Indies that yt shall & may be lawfull for them 
their ffacto rs or Assignes in their first voyadge or ffleete 
w ch is now in p r paringe for their first Adventure to the 
said East Indies to transporte out of this o r Realme of 
England all such forreine Coyne of sylver, eyther spannish or 
other forreine sylver as they haue pcured p r pared & gotten, or 
shall procure prepare or gett as likewyse all such other Coyne 
of sylver as they haue pcured or shall pcure to be coyned in o r 
mynte w tll in o r Tower of London out of such plate or bullion as 
ys or 1 shall be puided for 2 the said Gou r no r and Companie of 
m r chaunte of London trading into the East Indies their ffacto 1 ' 3 
or assignes before the goinge forth of the same ffleete in 3 this 
their 4 first voyadge 5 soe as the whole quantetie of Coyne & 
moneys to be transported in this their said first voyadge 6 doe 
not exceede the value or some of Thirtie Thowsand poundf 
starlinge And soe as the some of sixe thowsand poundf att the 
least pcell of the said some of Thirtie thowsand poundf be first 
Coyned in o r minte w th in our Tower of London 8 before the same 
shall be transported as aforesaid any lawe restrainte or phibition 
in that behalfe notw tll standinge. And in like 

After the said first r * j_*ii vj_ i ij o 

voyadge in aii the mann r of o r espetiall grace c'teme knowledge & 

rest of the voyages ^, > j j Q i r 

they may carry but? meere mocon, we haue graunted and 9 doe for vs 

in eu r y vyadge xxx , i -i 

mu of such forreine o r heires and successo 13 graunte vnto the said 
inloThe 8 Realm" soe Gou r no r and Company of m r chauntf of London 

as thereof 6 mil be . . J . . 

new coyned in the trading into the East Indies & their successo rs . 

That yt shall and may be lawfull to & for the 

said Gou r no r & Companie and their successo rs after the said first 

voyadge sett forth yearelie for and during the residue of the 

1 As it (Purchas). 2 By (Parch. Rec.). 

3 Altered to "if" in Harl. MS., probably in consequence of the omission noticed 
in note 6, which destroyed the sense of the passage. 

4 Their said (Harl. MS.). 5 In these three first voyages (Purchas). 
6 Harl. MS. omits this clause (" soe .... voyadge "). ' Out ? 

8 See page 13. 

9 The other texts read " and by these presents." 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 181 

said terme of ffifteene yeares to shipp and transporte out of 
this o r Realme of England or dominions of the same in any their 
other voyadgf to or towardf any the partf aforesaid in forme 
afore mencioned all such forreine Coyne of sylver, spannish or 
other forreine sylver or bullion of sylver, as they shall duringe 
the said terme bringe or cause to be brought into this Realme 
of England in 1 the ptf beyond the Seas, eyther in the same kinde 
sorte stampe or ffashion w ch yt shall haue when they bringe it in, 
or any other forme, stampe or fashion to be coyned w tll in o r Mint 
w th in o r Tower of London at their pleasuer, soe as the whole 
quantities of coyne or moneys by them to be transported in any 
their said voyage during the residue of the said terme doe not 
exceede the value or some of Thirtie Thowsand pounde in any 
one voyage, and soe as the some of sixe thowsand pound e at the 
least pcell of the said some or value of xxx m u soe to be trans- 
ported as aforesaid, be first coyned w th in o r said Tower of London 
before the same shall be transported in any of the said voyage 
any lawe statute restrainte or phibicon in that behalfe in any wyse 
notw th standinge. 

AND further we of o r ample and aboundant grace, more 3 
mocon and certeyne knowledge haue graunted 

That the trade shalbe . J r 

traded according to by 3 theis present^ for vs o r heires and successors, 

y c Ordenances of the r 

Company & not other- doe graunt vnto the said Gou r no r & Company ot 
m r chaunte of London trading into the East 
Indies & their successo rs that they and their successo" and their 
ffacto r3 servante or assignes in the trade of m r chandize for them 
& on their behalfe & not otherwyse shall for the said terme of 
ffyfteene yeares, haue, vse, and enioy the wholle entyre & onelie 
trade & traffique and the wholle entire & onelie libertie vse & 
priviledge of tradinge & traffiqueing & vsinge feat & trade of 
m r chandize to & from the said East Indies & to & from all the 
Ilande Porte Havens Citties Townes and places aforesaid in 
such manner & forme as ys aboue mencioned And that 4 the 
said Gou r no r & Company of m v chauntf of London tradinge into 

1 The other texts read " from." 

2 Mere (Harl. MS., Parch. Rec. and Purchas.). 

3 And by (Harl. MS., Parch. Rec. and Punhas). 

4 That they (Harl. MS. and Parch. Rec.). 



i8 2 FIRST LETTER BOOK 0? 

the East Indies, & eu r y pticuler & seu r all pson that now is, or 
that heerafter shalbe of that Company or incorporacon shall haue 
full and free authoritie libertie facultie lycence & power in forme 
aforesaid to trade & Tramque to & from the said East Indies, 
& all & eu r y the ptf thereof in forme aforesaid according to the 
orders ordenances & agreeing heereafter to be made & agreed 
vppon by the said Gou r no r & Companie of m r chauntf of London 
trading into the East Indies & their successo 1 ' 3 or the more pte of 
them present at any Courte or publique assemblie of or for the 
said Companie the Gou r no r of the said Companie or his Deputie 
for the tyme beinge alwaies present att such Courte or assembly 
& not otherwyse. 

And for that the shipps sayleing into the said Indies must 
take their due & propp tymes to pceede in theis voyage w ch other- 
wyse as we well pceaue cannot be pformed in the rest of the yeare 
followinge. THERFORE we of o r especiall grace 

That 6 good shipps . & . 1,0 ~ e i 

& 6 pinnaces shaibe ccrteinc knowledge & mecre mocon for vs o r heires 

yearelie permitted to . 

goe into the East & successo rs do graunt to & w th the said Gou r no r & 

Indies & joo ma- 

riners any restraint Company of m r chauntf of London tradinge into 

notwthstandinge ex- . . 

ce P t the Nauie Royaii the East Indies and their successo rs , that in any 

goe forth. J 

tyme of restrainte sixe good shipps & sixe good 
Pynnaces well furnished w th ordenance & other municon for their 
defence, & flue hundred Mariners Englishmen to guide & sayle in 
the same sixe shipps & sixe Pynnaces att all tymes during the 
said terme of fyfteene yeares shall quietlie be pmitted & suffered 
to departe & goe in the said voyages accordinge to the purport of 
theis p r sentf w tll out any stay or contradiccon by vs o r heires or 
successo" or by y e Lo : High admirall or any other officer or 
subiect of vs o r heires or successors for the tyme being in any 
wyse any restrainte lawe statute vsage or matter whatsoeu r to 
the contrarie notw th standinge. 

PROUIDED neu r theles that yf we shall att any tyme w th in 
the said terme of fifteene yeares, haue iust cause to arme our 
Navy in warlike manner in defence of o r Realme or for Offence of 
o r enymies or that yt shall be found needfull to ioyne to the Navy 
of vs o r heires or successo rs the shipps of o r subiectf to be alsoe 
armed for the warres to such a number as can not be supplied yf 
the said sixe shipps and sixe Pynnasses should be pmitted to 



THE EAST ItfDlA COMPANY. 183 

departe as aboue is mentioned then vpon knowledge geven to 1 vs 
o r heires or successo rs or by any 3 Admirall to the said Gou r no r & 
Company aboute the xx th day of the monneth of lulie, or three 
monnethes before the said Gou r no r and Companie shall begynn to 
make readie the same sixe shipps and sixe Pynnasses, that 
we may not spare the said sixe shipps & six Pynnasses & the 
Mariners requisite for them, to be out of o r Realme during the 
tyme that o r Navy shall be vpon the Seas. That then the said 
Gou r no r and Company shall forbeare to send sixe such shipps & 
sixe Pinnacf for their trade of m r chandize, vntill that we shall 
revoke or w ttl drawe o r said Navy for this 3 service. And we of o r 
further royall favo r and of o r especiall grace 
certeine knowledge and meere mocon haue 
graunted, and by theis present^ for vs o r heires & 
K" & th assent th of successo rs doe graunte vnto the said Gou r no r & 
Company of m r chaunte of London tradinge into 
the East Indies and to their successo rs That the said East Indies 
nor the Ilandf Havens Portf Citties Townes or places thereof, 
nor of any pte thereof shall 4 be visited frequented or haunted by 
any of the subiectf of vs o r heires or successo 1 ' 8 during the said 
terme of xv teene yeares contrarie to the true meaneing of theis 
present^. And by vertue of o r p r rogatiue royall, w ch we will not 
in that behalfe be argued or brought in question : We straight 
chardge comaund and phibitt for vs o r heires & successo rs all the 
subiectf of vs o r heires or successo rs of what degree or qualitie 
soeu r they be, that none of them directlie or indirectlie visitt 
haunte frequent or Trade, tramque or adventure by way of 
m r chandize into or from any of the said East Indies, or into & 
from any of the Ilandf , Portf Havens, Citties Townes or places 
aforesaid other then the said Gou r no r & Company of m r chaunt 
of London trading into the East Indies, and such pticuler psons 
as now be or heereafter shall be of that Companie their Agent f 
ffacto rs & assignes duringe the said terme of fyfteene yeares B vnles 

1 By (Parch. Rec.). 2 Our (Parch. Rec.). 

3 From the said (Parch. Rec.}. 

4 Parch. Rec. and Purchas read " shall not "; Harl. MS. agrees with the text. 

5 " This prohibition reacheth to all englishe men w do adventer thither amonge 
" the duche men yf there goodes should be brought into England that we might seaze 
"on it." (Note in another hand in the margin of Harl. MS.) 



I8 4 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

yt be by & w th such licence and agreement of the said Gou r no r & 
Companie of m r chauntf of London tradinge to the East Indies in 
wryting first had & obtayned vnder their Comon scale to be 
graunted, vpon payne that euery such pson or psonns that shall 
trade or traffique into or from any of the said East Indies other 
then the Gou r no r & Company of m r chauntf of London & their 
forfecture of goodes successo r8 shall incurr o r indignacon and the for- 
&shipps fecture & losse of the goodes m r chaundizes & 

other thingf whatsoeu r w ch soe shall be brought into this o r 
Realme of England or any the dominion [s] of the same contrarie 
to o r said phibition, or the purporte or l true meaneing of theis 
present^ as alsoe the shipp and shipps w th the furniture thereof 
wherein such goodf m r chaundizes or thingf shalbe brought : 
Diuision of the Tne halfe 2 of all the said forfectures to be to vs o r 

heires and successo", and the other halfe of all & 
eu r y the said forfecture [s] we doe by theis present^ of o r espetiall 
grace certeine knowledge & meere mocon clearlie and whollie for 
vs o r heires and successo giue and graunte vnto the said Gou r no r 
and Companie of m r chaunt of London trading into the East 

Indies. And further all & eu r y the said Offendo 1 ' 3 

Imprisonm*. . /v 

for their said Contempt to suffer imprisonment 
duringe o r pleasure and such other ponishm' as to vs o r heires or 
successo" for soe high a Contempt shall seeme meete & con- 
venient & not to be in any wyse deliu r ed vntill they & eu r y of them 
entnng into bond of shalbe come bound vnto the said Gou r no r for the 

tyme being in the some of looo 11 att the least at 
noe tyme then after during this present graunte to sayle or 
traffique into any of the said East Indies contrarie to o r expresse 
Comaundement in that behalfe herein sett downe & published. 
HOW the comp: And further for the better encouragem* of 
tT y otCr& ly whai m r chaunt 3 straungers & others to bringe in 

Comodities into this our Realme, we for vs o r 
heires and successo" doe graunt vnto the said Gou r no r & Com- 
panie of m r chaunte of London tradinge into the East Indies that 
they & their successo" shall from tyme to tyme for any Consider- 
acon or benefitt to be taken to their owne vse graunt or giue 

1 And (Harl. MS.). 2 One halfe (Parch. Rec.). 

3 Merchauntes (Harl. MS.). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 185 

licence to any pson or psons to sayle trade or traffique into or 
from any of the said East Indies soe as such licence be graunted 
or geuen before such goodf wares & nV'chaundizes be laid on land, 
& soe as such lycence be made by the said Gou r no r & Company of 
m r chaunt of London tradinge into the East Indies for the tyme 
beinge vnder their Comon seale. And further of o r especiall 
That her matio win g race certeyne knowledge, & meere mocon, we 
t n otnfXr S Jo C e e n n ter h aue Condescended and graunted, and by theis 
saSduring"^^^ present^ for 1 o r heires and successo 1 ' 3 wee doe 

condescend & graunt vnto the said Gou r no r & 
Companie of m r chauntf of London tradinge into the 3 East Indies 
and their successo 1 ' 3 that we o r heires & successo 1 ' 3 during the said 
terme of xv teene yeares will not graunte libertie licence or power to 
any pson or psons whatsoeu 1 ' contrary to the Teno r of theis o r tres 
Pattentf to sayle passe trade or traffique to the said East Indies 
or into or from the Ilandf portf Havens Citties Townes or place 
aforesaid or any of them contrarie to the true meaneinge of theis 
present^ w th out the Consent of the said Gou r no r & Company 
of m r chaunte of London trading into the East Indies or the 
most pte of them. And o r will and pleasure is and hereby we doe 
That the company alsoe ordeyne that that yt shall & may be lawfull 
a n y th a e 1 ir nit p t .ea s t ure r s to & for the said Gou^o 1 ' & Company of 

m r chauntf of London tradinge into the East 
Indies or the more pte of them whereof the Gou r no r for the tyme 
being or his deputie to be one to admitt into, & to be of the 
said Company all such apprentises to any of the said ffellowshipp 
or company and all such servauntC & ffacto 1 ' 33 of or for the said 
Company, all such others as to them or the more pte of them 
present at any Courte held for the said Company the Gou r no r or 
his deputie being one shalbe thought ffitt and agreeable w th the 
orders and Ordenances to be made for the Gou^m* of the said 
That y f any named Company PROUIDED alwaies that yf any of 

the psons before named and appointed by theis 



aduenture sett downe t r r 1 i /~ f 

y t shaii be lawfuii for present^ to be free of the said Companie of 

1 For Us- (Parch. Rec. and Purchas). " The said (Harl. MS.). 

3 " We may by generall consent admyt & make free our other servantes w were 
" not employed as ffactors; and all suche other persons as we thinck good." (Marginal 
note on Harl. MS.) 



i86 FIRST LETTER BOOK of 

> Compare to dis- m r chauntf of London tradinge into the East 

franchyse him. 

Indies shall not before the goinge forth of the 
ffleete appointed for this first voyadge from the porte of London 
bringe in & deliu r to the Threr or Thrers appointed, or w ch w th in 
the space of Twentie daies next after the date hereof shalbe 
appointed by the said gou r no r & Company or the more pte of 
them, to receiue the Contribucons and adventures sett downe by 
the seu r all Aduenturo 1 ' 8 in this first 1 & present voyadge now in 
hand to be sett forth such somes of money as haue beene by 
any of the said psons by theis present^ nominated to be of the 
said Company expressed sett downe & written in a booke appointed 
for that purpose, & left in the handf of the said Thomas Smyth 
Gou r no r of the said Company or of the said Paule Bannynge Aid of 
London and subscribed w th the names or 2 of the same aduenturo 
vnder their handf & agreed vpon to be aduentured in the said first 
voyadge that then yt shall be lawfull for the said Gou r no r 
and Companie or the more pte of them, whereof the said 
Gou r no r or his deputie to be one at any their generall Courte, 
or generall assembly to remoue disfranchise & displace him or 
them att their wills and pleasures. And the said Gou r no r & 
The Companie doe Company of m r chaunte of London tradinge into 
SfteTSi'V vopdg" the East Indies for them and their successo rs doe 
moTnethl afgrea? b Y theis present? couenant pmyse & graunte to 
eoffi nte or e toSSS & w th 3 o r heires & successo rs that they the said 
car y rro a ut th t e h ys hr a sj Gou r no r & Company and their successo rs in all & 

eu r y such .voyage as they att any tyme or tymes 
heareafter duringe the said tearme shall make out of this Realme 
by vertue of this o r graunt and tres Pattentf the first voyadge 
onelie excepted shall & will vpon eu r y retourne w ch shall be made 
backe agayne into this o r Realme or any of o r dominions or w tll in 
sixe monnethes next after eu r y such retourne bringe into this o r 
Realme of England from the said East Indies or from some other 
parte; beyond the seas out of o r Dominions, as greate or greater 
value in bullion of gould or syluer, or other forreyne Coyne of 
gould or silver respectiuelie for eu r y voyadge, the first voyadge 

1 The other threj texts read " last." 2 Omitted in the other texts. 

3 The other texts add " Us." 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 187 

Onelie excepted as shall be by force of theis present? transported 
and carried out of this Realme by them or any of them in any 
kinde of sylver abouesaid \vhatsoeu r in any of the said voyadg? 
and that all such sylver as by vertue of this o r graunte & tres 
Patent? shall be shipped or laden by the said Gou r no r & Company 
or their successo" to be transported out of this Realme in any of 
the said voyag?, shall from tyme to tyme at the settinge forth of 
AH syiver or gouid i eu r y such pticuler voyadge be shipped or laden att 
Smpt f s hafbe by shi h p e - the Port? or Havens of London Darmouth or 
ro d nd a ot th D e a p rtm e outh f Plymouth, or at some of the same port? or 
havens, & at no other porte or haven whatsoeu r 
w th in this o r Realme or the dominions thereof and that all & eu r y 
such syluer as from tyme to tyme shall be shipped & laden in the 
said Port? of London Dartmouth or Plymouth, or any of them to 
be by force of theis present? transported out of this Realme as 2 
aforesaid shall from tyme to tyme be dulie entered by the 
Customer Comptroller Collecto 1 ' or other officer to whome yt 
shall appteyne of eu r y such Porte or Haven where the same shall 
happen to be shipped or laden in the Custome booke belonging to 
the said porte or Haven before such tyme as the same shall be 
shipped or laden to be transported as aforesaid w th out any 
Custome or subsydie to be paied for the same. And that in like 
manner all & all manner of gould & sylver whatsoeu r w ch shall be 
brought into this realme or any of o r dominions by the said 
Gou r no r & Companie or any of them accordinge to the true 
meaneinge of theis present? shall be likewyse 3 from tyme to tyme 
dulie entered by the Customer Comptroller or other officer of 
eu r y such Porte Creeke or place where the same gould or silver 
shall happen to be vnshipped or brought to land before such tyme 
as the same gould or silver, or any pte thereof shall be vnshipped 
This pnuiiedg shaii or brought to land as ys aforesaid. PROUIDED 
p?ace ext b e e n ing in fn AC alwaies neu r theles & o r will & pleasure is that 



SS'SSFuSS^ theis o r tres Patent? or any thinge therein Con- 
mat^7 ytlc wth teyned shall not in any sorte extend to giue or 

1 " We haue not any liberty granted to carry out any gold by name but only 
syluer." (Marginal note on Harl. MS.) 

2 The other texts add "is." 

3 The other texts transpose this and the preceding word. 



188 PIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

graunte any lycence power or aucthoritie vnto the said 
Gou r no r & Company of m r chauntf of London trading into 
the East Indies or to any of them to vndertake or addresse any 
trade vnto any Countrie Port, Hand, Haven, Cittie, Creeke 
Towne or place being alreadie in the lawfull & actuall possession 
of any such Christian Prince or state as at this present is or at 
any tyme heereafter shall be in league or amytie w th vs o r heires 
or successo rs , or w ch doth not or will not accept of such trade but 
doth ouertlie declare and publishe the same to be vtterlie against 
his or their good will & likeing any thinge beinge 1 before in theis 
present^ conteyned to the Contrarie thereof notw th standinge. 

PROUIDED alsoe that yf yt shall heereafter appeare to vs 
H this priviiedge be * heires or successo rs that this graunte, or the 
f fTthe KmTt a h b en Continuance thereof in the wholle or in any pte 
thereof shall not be pffitable to vs o r o r heires and 
successo rs & to this o r Realme that then and from 
benefidaM lb the f n U " d c from thenceforth vpon & after two yeares warne- 
t a r s ome e addkons inge to be gevcn to the said Company by vs o r 
heires or successo rs vnder o r or their priuie seale 
or signe Manuell, this present graunt shall cease, be voied, and 
determined to all entente construccons & purposes. And further 
of o r espetiall grace certeine knowledg & meere mocon we haue 
Condescended and graunted, and by theis present^ for vs o r 
heires and successo 13 doe Condescend & graunte to the said 
Gou r no r & Company of m r chaunte of London trading into the 
East Indies & their successo" that yf att the end of the said 
tearme of fifteene yeares yt shall seeme meete & Convenient vnto 
the said Gou r no r & Company or any the pties aforesaid that this 
present graunte shall be continued. And yf that alsoe it shall 
appeare vnto vs o r heires and successo" that the Continuance 
thereof shall not be preiudiciall or hurtfull to this o r Realme but 
that we shall finde the further continuance thereof profitable for 
vs o r heires and successo" and for our Realme w th such Condicons 
as are herein mencioned, or w th some alteracon or qualificacon 
thereof that then we o r heires or successo" at the instaunce and 
humble peticon of the said Gou r no r and Company or any of them 

1 Omitted in the other three texts. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 189 

to be made vnto vs o r heires & successo rs will graunte and make 
vnto the said Gou r no r and Company or any of them soe suinge 
for the same and such other pson or psons o rl subiectf as they 
shall nominate and appointe or shall be by vs o r heires or 
successo 1 ' 3 newly nominated not exceadinge in number fower & 
Twentie new ires Patent^ vnder the greate scale of England in 
due forme of lawe w th like grauntf couenantf 2 clauses & articles 
as in theis present^ are conteyned or w th addicon of other 
necessarie articles or changeinge of theis into some other partf 
for and duringe the full terme of ffyfteene yeares then next 
followinge Willinge hereby and streightlie chardgeinge and 
Comaundeinge all & singuler o r Admiralls viceadmiralls Justices 
Maiors Sheriff^ Escheato 1 ' 3 Cunstables baylifff and all & singuler 
other o r Officers ministers leidgmen and subiectf whatsoeu r to 
be aydeinge favo r inge helpeing and assistinge vnto the said 
Gou r no r and Company and to their successo 1 ' 3 and to their 
deputies officers ffacto 1 ' 3 servauntf assignes & mynisters and eu r y 
of them in executeing and enioyeinge the premisses aswell on 
land as on Sea from tyme to tyrne when you or any of you shall 
there vnto be required any statute, acte, ordenance provisoe 
proclamacon or restrainte heretofore had made sett forth 
ordeyned or puided, or any other matter cause or thinge what- 
soeu 1 ' to the Contrarie in any wyse notw th standinge Although 
expresse mencon of the true yearelie value or certeinetie of the 
premisses or of any of them, or of any other Guiftf or graunte 
by vs or any of o r progenito rs to the said Gou r no r & Company of 
m r chauntf of London tradinge into the East Indies, or to any 
of them before this tyme made in theis present^ is not made 
Or any statute Acte ordenaunce pvision pclamacon or restrainte 
to the Contrary hereof heretofore had, made, ordeyned or puided, 
or any other thinge cause or matter whatsoeu r in any wyse 
notw th standinge. 

IN WITNES whereof wee haue caused theis o r ires to be 
made Patent^ Witnes o r selfe att Westminster the xxxi th day 
of December in the three & forteth yeare of o r Reigne 

p bre de private sigillo &c a 
Huberd. 

J Or (Harl. MS.). * The other texts transpose this and the preceding word, 




igo FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

An agreem* 1 w th Wittm Cobreth for discoiTy of the Norwest 
Passadge w th C: 2 Waymouth. 

| HIS Indenture made the xx th day of Aprill Anno Dni 
1602. & in the 44 th yeare of the Reigne of o r sou r eigne 
Ladie Elizabeth by the grace of god Queene of 
England ffraunce & Ireland defendo 1 " of the faith &c : 
Betweene Thomas Cambell of London Alderman on thone ptie & 
Wittm Cobreth of Ratliffe in the Countie of Midds Mariner on 
thother ptye. Witnesseth that whereas a cteine voyadge is 
p r tended by godf grace, to be made from hence into the Norwest 
pt of China, Cataia, or lapan or any other land in the latitude 
of 50 Degres Northward in the pt of 3 beyond the Seas. It is 
Couenanted, condescended, and now fullie agreed by and 
betweene the said pties to theis presentf in manner and forme 
following that is to saie. The said Wittm Cobreth for him his 
Executo rs and Administrate 1 ' 3 & for euery of them doth Couenant 
and graunte to and w th the said Thomas Cambell his Execute 1 ' 3 & 
Administrate & eu r y of them by theis p^entf. That he the said 
Wittm Cobreth shall and will be readie in the Cittie of London 
& goe on the said voyadge, & therein Contynue for the discou r y 
of the said Norwest ptf , from hence of China Cataia or lapan or 
any other land in the latitude of 50 Degres Northward at the 
Comaundem* will & appointm 1 of Capt: George Waymouth in 
such a ship as the same Capten shall thinke good. And on the 
same voyadge shall proceede and saile effectuallie to thutmost 
of his skill or knowledg w th out fraude or Coven, and not depte or 
goe from the said voyadge w th out the spetiall lycence of the said 
Capt: George Waymouth first had and obtayned in that behalfe. 
In Consideracon whereof the said Wittm Cobreth hath receiued 
in hand at thensealeing & deliu r y hereof the some of xx u of &c: in 
pte of paym* of his wages for the said pretended voyadge, whereof 
he acknowleth himselfe fullie satisfied and contented. And the 
said Thomas Cambell for him his [executors] and AdminI & for 
eu r y of them doth Couenante & graunte to & w th the said Wittm 
Cobreth his Execute" & Admi by theis p r sent That he the said 

1 See page 21. 8 A word has been omitted here, 

? Captain. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 191 

Thomas Cambell his Execu or Ass 3 shall well and trulie paie or 
cause to be paid vnto the said Wiftm Cobreth his Execu or Ass 3 
vpon the discou r y of the said Norvvest passadg or ptf of China, 
Cataia, or lapan, or any other land in the latitude of 50 Degres 
Northward and retourne from thence into the Realme of England 
the some of six poundc of &c, for eu r y monneth that the said 
Wiftm Cobreth shall be vpon the said voyadge (the said xx u paid 
in hand as aforesaid being reconed as pte & pcell thereof [)]. 
Provided alwaies that yf the said Wiftm Cobreth & his Comp. 
shall not fortune to discou 1 ' the said Norwest pt of China, Cataia 
or lapan or any other Land in the Latitude of 50 Degres North- 
ward as aforesaid : Then the said Thomas Cambell his Execu or 
Assignes shall well & trulie paie or cause to be paid vnto the said 
Wiftm Cobreth his Executo rs or Assignes, onelie the some of 
iij u of &c: for eu r y monneth that the said Wiftm Cobreth shall 
be vpon the said voyadge the said xx h paid in hand as aforesaid 
being alwaies accompted as pte & pcell thereof. In Witnes &c: 



A Coppie of a tre of Reprisall for the East Indian 
Marchaunt^. 1 




Earle of Notingham 2 Baron of Effingham 
knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Lord 
Leiuetenante of her ma ties Counties of Sussex & 
Surrey Constable of hir ma^ hono 1 ' 3 and Castle of 
Windsor Ld : High Admirall of England Ireland and Wales and 
the Dominions & lies of the same, Of the Towne of Callis & 
m r ches thereof Normandy Gascoyne and Guines & Capteine 
Gen r all of her ma ties Seas & Navy royall. To all Christian People 
to whome theis present^ shall come or other wyse appteyne 
greeting in o 1 ' Lord god eu r lasting. Whereas o r souereigne Lady 

1 See note on the subsequent document. 

2 Well known as the commander of the English fleet in its conflict with the 
Armada of 1588. 

3 Cp. Stow, speaking of Whitehall, " King Henry VIII. ordained it to be called. 
an honour" 



Ig2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Elizabeth by the grace of god Queene of England ffraunce & 
Ireland defendo r of the faith &c : beinge Crediblie adverticed that 
the kinge of Spaine hath of late made staye of the shipps goodf 
& m r chandizes of hir ma tics : loueing subiectf w th in the Realme of 
Spaine & Portingale & other places of his Dominions, & hath caused 
them their 1 being for the trade of m r chandizes to be reteyned 
& kept in prizon Contrary to the order of Lawe & Justice. Upon 
the humble and pitifull sute of hir ma tics said subiectf the 
nV'chauntf owners & others interessed in the said ships goodf and 
psonns soe stayed made to hir ma tie for ires of Reprisalls to be 
graunted vnto them and that they not haueing any other meanes 
by order of Justice to be yealded vnto them might by lycenced to 
stay apprehend and take the shipps goodf & nV'chandizes of the 
kinge of Spaine, or any his Subiectf wheresoeu r vpon the Seas to 
aunsweare and satisfie the losse and damadge by them susteyned 
by reason of their ships and goodf soe taken and reteyned hath 
by her ma ties : Ires Patentf beareing date the ninth day of lulie 
1585. vnder her ma ties : scale willed and authorized me as hir ma'f 
Admirall to graunt Comission for the apprehending and takeing 
the shipps goodf & nYchandizes of the kinge of Spaine, or any 
his subiectf to such hir ma tes loueing subiectf soe dampnified & 
in such manner and forme and according to such articles & 
orders as by the lordf & others of her ma'f privie Councell or by 
any six of them should be agreed vpon & set downe vnder their 
handf . And whereas tenn of the Lordf & others of her ma tics : 
privy Councell haue agreed upon Certeine articles & orders in 
that behalfe & haue set downe the same in writeing vnder their 
handf & haue deliuered the same to me for my direccon herein w ch 
ar cies orders be & remaine w th me of recorde. And whereas 
further the Gou r no r and Assistantf & Companie of the m r chauntf 
of London trading for the East Indies, haue made proofe before 
me that certeine of their goodf shipps & m r chandizes, were of 
late stayed arrested & deteyned in the ptf of Spaine by the kingf 
order & authoritie there, & that the losse & damadge thereof vnto 
them by reason of the said stay & seasure ariseing doth amounte to 
the some of aooo 11 ster: or thearaboutf wherevpon the said Gou r no r 
& Assistauntf & Company of the nV'chauntf of London trading for 

There. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



193 



the East Indies aforesaid haue reedy victualled & furnished to the 
Seas one Shipp Called the Suzan 1 of London of the burthen of 
250 Tonnes or thereaboutes whereof lohn Havard goeth Capteine 
& Samuell Spencer m r w th mariners & menn of Warr being 

victualled for monnethes & furnished w th Caste peeces & 

haue likewyse entred into bond in hir ma ties high Courte of the 
Admiralty that neither the said shipp nor any the Company 
thereof shall not attempt against any hir ma ties loueing subiectf 
the subiectf of the ffrentch kinge the kingf of Scotland Denmarke 
or Sweden or any the Inhabitants of the United provinces of the 
Haunce Townes or lowe Countries or the subiectc of any other 
Prince or potentate being in good league and amity w th her ma tie , 
but onelie against the Subiectf of the kinge of Spaine : And 
alsoe shall bring or cause to be brought all such shipps good or 
m r chandizes as they shall soe take & apprehend of the kinge of 
Spaine or any his subiectf together w th three or fower of the 
Company of eu r y such prize as shall be of most accompte whereof 
the m r & Pilott to be twoe to some porte of this hir ma ties 
Realme of England as shall be most Convenient for them, And 
shall not breake, bulke, waste, spoyle, sell or diminish any such 
shipps & goodf soe taken vntill the shall be adiudged in hir 
ma ties ^h Courte of the Admiraltie to be lawfull prize. And 
therevpon an Inventorie to be taken by the viceadmirall of the 
place or his Deputie & other publique Officers of the same, And 
appraisment made of the same goodf by some six honest menn 
Inhabitant^ of the said Porte where they shall soe arriue, 
and that the same Inventory & appraism* shall be retourned 
into hir ma ties high Courte of the Admiraltie w th in six weekf 
then next ensueing. Know ye therefore that I the said Charles 
Earle of Notingham Lord High Ad u aforesaid by vertue of 
her ma ties said ires Pattentf to me directed doe lycence and 
authorize the said Gou r no r & Assistauntf & Company of the 
m r chaunte of London trading for the East Indies to sett forth 
to the Seas the said shipp called the Suzan, soe as is aforesaid 

1 This commission is only for the one vessel, the Susan. But in the letter of 
instructions to the Judge of the Admiralty Court, which follows the present document, 
all the four ships are mentioned. It seems probable therefore that a separate commis- 
sion was issued for each ship, of which this particular one was entered as a specimen. 

O 



I94 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

furnished & munited and therew th to sett vpon and by force of 
Armes to staie & apprehend of the ships goodf & m r chandizes of 
the kinge of Spaine, or any his subiectf in as ample manner as 
if it were in the tyme of open warr betwixt her ma tie : & the 
said kinge of Spaine, & the said ships goodf & m r chandizes 
soe taken and brought into some porte of this hir ma ties Realme 
of England, & thereof an Inventory taken, appraism* made & 
iudgm* geven in the said high Courte of the Adm tie : in the 
said high Courte of the Admiralty for the Approbacon of the 
same to be agood & lawfull prize in manner & forme afore- 
said. Then the said ships goodf & m r chandizes to keepe and 
reteyne in his or their possession & to make sale & dispose 
thereof in open m r kett or howsoeu r els to their best benefitt in 
as ample & beneficiall manner, as if the said ships goodf & 
m r chandizes had bene Come by, through the lawfull traffique & 
trade of m r chauntf or of iust prize in the tyme of open warr 
betwixt hir ma tie & the said kinge of Spaine soe that neither the 
said Capteine master nor any the Company thereof that shall in 
his or their owne psonn serue in the shipp aforesaid, or otherwyse 
bear Chardge in the Adventure, or in any other sorte further or 
sett forewardf the said enterprize in manner & forme aforesaid, 
shall not be reputed or challendged for any offendo r against hir 
ma tie8 lawes and that alsoe it shall be lawfull for any manner of 
pson to buye the said ships goodf & m r chandizes soe as afore- 
said taken prayzed Inventoryed & adiudged w th out any daunger 
losse hindraunce trouble molestacon or incumbraunce whatsoeu* 
Provided alwaies that yf by Colo r of this Comission there shall 
be taken any shipps goodf or m r chandizes of any hir ma tie8 : 
loueing subiectf the subiectf of the ffrench kinge, the kingf of 
Scotland Denmarke or Sweden or any the Inhabitant^ of the 
united prouinces of the hance Townes or lowe Countries or the 
subiectf of any other Prince or Potentate being in good league 
& amity w tb hir ma tie & the same or any other shipps taken by 
authoritie hereof shalbe spoyled sould imbeaselled or dyminished 
before they shall be adiudged in her ma tiea high Courte of the 
Ad ty : to belong to the king of Spaine, or any of his subiectf 
that then this Comission to be void and of noe sufficient 
authoritie, either to take the said shipps & goodf or to warrante 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 195 

or saue harmlesse such as shall receiue, bye or intermeddle 
therein, but that alsoe both the prizes soe taken, & the shipps 
of warr shall be Confiscate to o r vse. Prouided alsoe that the 
said shipps goodf and m r chandizes soe as is aforesaid, after an 
Inventory taken, appraism 1 made & Judgment geven in manner 
and forme aforesaid shall be equallie devided into three ptf, 
whereof one pte to goe to the m r chaunt & owners of the said 
shipp, another pte to the victuallers & the third parte to the 
Captaine master mariners & souldiers thereof. Provided further 
that this Comission shall remaine and be in force during this 
their present voyadg, & noe longer In witnes whereof I haue 
herevnto caused the greate seale of myne office to be affixed : 
Yeven at London in hir ma ties high Courte of the Ad ty aforesaid 
the 23 th day of Aprill. 1601. And in the 43 th yeare of the Reigne 
of o r sou r eigne Lady Elizabeth by the grace of god Queene of 
England ffraunce & Ireland defendo r of the faith &c : 



A ire from the Earle of Notingham to m r Ceasar 1 ludge of the 
high Courte of the Ad*? : 

| r Ceasar the marchauntf of London haueing prepared 
fower good shipps for the voyadg to the East Indies 
in the trade of m r chandizes haue beene suto vnto 
me 2 for Comission to take any shipps or goodf 
belonging to the king of Spaine or to any of his subiectf? either 
in their way outwardf, or in their retourne, w ch I haue beene 
Contented to graunte vnto them. Therefore I doe pray you to 
cause Comission to be drawen for them, to furnish vnto the 

1 See note 2, page 25. 

3 Nothing can be traced in the Court Minutes as to this application. The only 
reference to the matter is under date of 22nd Jan., 1600/1, when, the question having 
been raised of the mariners' share "upon such reprisals as may happen in the 
"voyage," it was answered that there was "no intention to make any attempt for 
"reprisals, but only to pursue the voyage in a merchantlike course. Yet notwith- 
standing if any opportunity be offered without prejudice or hazard of the said 
"voyage" Captain Lancaster was to take such course therein as he should think 
meet. 

O I 




I9 6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Seas in warlike manner for that purpose, the Read Dragon of 
London, whereof lames Lancaster goeth Capteine, The Hecto r 
the Assencon & the Suzan of the same Porte vnder such articles 
& Caucon as are prescribed by hir ma tie for reprisalls, for w ch 
yo r soe doing this shall be yo r warrante, ffrom the Courte at 
Whitehall the I4th of January 1600. 

Yo r loueing freind 
Notingham 




Lres Pattentf 1 for transportacon of aoooo 11 in money to the 
Gou r no r of East India 1606. 

JAMES by the grace of God kinge of England ffraunce 
and Ireland defendo r of the faith &c : To all to whome 
theis present? shall come greetinge. Wheareas o r 
late deare sister Q: Elizabeth by her ires Patent^ 
vnder the greate seale of England beareing date at Westminster 
the xxxj th day of Decemfo in the xliij th yeare of her Reigne vpon 
peticon made vnto her by diu r s her loueing Subiectf, for her 
Royall assent and lycence to be graunted vnto them. That they 
at their owne Adventure Costf and Chardgf aswell for the 
Honor of this Realme of England, as for increase of Navigacon & 
Advancem* of Trade of m r chandize w th in the same, might 
Adventure and set forth c r teine voyadgC w th a Convenient nomber 
of shipps and Pinnaces by way of Traffique & m r chandize into the 
East Indies in the Countries and Port? of Asia & Africa did 
incorporate the said Peticioners into abodie pollitique by the 
name of the Gou r no r and Companie of the m r chauntf of London 
trading to the East Indies. To haue hould and enioye the sole 
benefitt of the trade and traffique of the said East Indies 
for the space of xv yeares from the byrth of o r Lord God 
then last past before the date of the said tres Patent? . And 

1 There is no entry of this document in the Calendar of State Papers, E, Indies, 
1513-1616, and it would seem that the copy here printed is the only one extant. The 
origin and scope of the Patent are clearly explained in the document itself. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. igj 

whereas by the same ires Patent^ lycence was graunted to the 
said Gou r no r and Companie of m r chaunt of London tradinge 
into the East Indies to transporte out of this Realme into the 
said Indies in eu r y of their voyadgf duringe the said terme of 
15 yeares all such fforreigne Coyne of silver, Spanish or other 
fforraine sylver, or bullion of sylver, as they should duringe the 
said tearme bringe or cause to be brought into this Realme of 
England, from the pt beyond the Seas, either in the same kinde, 
stampe, sorte or fashion, w ch yt should haue when they brought it 
in, or in any other forme, stampe, or fashion coyned in the Mynte 
w th in the Tower of London ; soe as the whole quantities of Coyne 
or moneys by them to be transported in any their said voyagf 
during the said tearme should not exceed the value of 30ooo u in 
any one voyadge, and soe as the some of vj m poundes at the least 
pcell of the said some or value of 3oooo u to be transported as 
aforesaid should be first Coyned w th in the same Tower of London, 
before the same might be transported in any of the said voyadgf 
as by the said ires Patent^ more at lardge appeareth. 

Now forasmuch as the said Gou r no r and Companie of the 
said m r chant since the said ires Patentf to them graunted, 
haue made 2 seu r all voyadgf into the said East Indies, & 
retourned their ships from thence laden w th sundrie kindf of 
m r chandizes pmtable for o r kingdomes, and haue alsoe prepared 
& are readie to set forth an other voyadge into the said East 
Indies, & haue humblie besought by peticon, & shewed vnto vs, 
that by experience they haue form r lie found that they could 
not w th out greate difficultie, & losse vnto them in the value of 
their moneys new coyned, make trade for their m r chandize into 
the said East Indies, because they were not such as the people of 
those t were acquainted w th all : but stamped w th an Image or 
supscripcon straunge & vnknowne vnto them. 1 And that they 
haue beene and are desierous by all good meanes to manadge, 
& carrie their said trade as neare as they Cann for the benefitt of 
o r kingdomes and dominions rather by the transportacon of the 
Natiue Comodities of the same and by bartringe & exchaunge 
of them for fforreine Comodities w ch now they purpose more 

1 See note, page 13. 



i 9 8 FIRST LETTER BOOK Of 

lardglie to attempt and haue good hope to accomplish, then 
by vsing the whole libertie graunted to them by the said ires 
Patent^ for carrieing out of the full some of 30000" in eu r y 
voyadge in manner aforesaid. And that they will content them 
selues in this their now third entended voyadge into the East 
Indies, w th the libtie of transportinge xx 1 ^ onelie in forreine 
Coynes w th out transportacon of any other Coyne, bullion, 
or silver. In reguard whereof they did humblie pray in their 
said peticon that we would be graciouslie pleased to graunte 
them lycence that they may transporte the value of xx^ 
of forreine Coyne in this their entended voyadge, w th out new 
coyninge the same or any pte thereof. Know yee therefore 
that we favoringe the said m r chant, & being desierous to giue 
them all furtherance & encouradgm* to proceede & goe forward 
in their trade of o r especiall grace, certeine knowledge and meere 
mocon, haue geven and graunted, and by theis present^ for vs, 
o r heires & Successo doe giue and graunte lycence vnto the said 
Gou r no r and Companie of m r chaunt of London tradinge into the 
East Indies. That it shall and may be lawfull for them their facto" 
& Assignes in his 1 now p r tended voyadge into the East Indies to 
transporte out of this o r Realme of England all such forreine 
Coine or sylver, either spannish or other forreine silver, as they 
haue prepared, pcured, or gotten, or shall prepare pcure or gett 
being alredie brought or to be brought from the partf beyond 
the seas, before the depture of their shipps out of the Ryver of 
Thames. Soe as the whole quantitie of the Coyne an ' moneys 
by them to be transported in this their p r sent intended voyadge 
towardc the said East Indies, doe not exceed the said value 
of 2oooo u . The same to be transported in the same kinde, sorte, 
stampe, or fashion, as the said moneys, are or shall be pcured, 
gotten, or brought into this Realme of England, and that w th out 
any new coyninge or altringe the said moneys or any pte thereof, 
from the stampe it beareth, any statute restrainte or phibicon in 
that behalfe made to the Contrarie in any wyse notw th standinge. 
In Witnes whereof we haue caused theis o r Ires to be made 
Patent^. Witnes o r selfe at Westminster the v tb day of lanuarie 

1 Should evidently be "this." 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 199 

in the 4th yeare of o r Reigne of England ffraunce & Ireland, 
& of Scotland the XI th . 1 

Ravencroft 
p Bre de priuato sigillo &c : 



A COPPIE 2 of the Patent for mitigacon of the Statute 
for garbling spices. 

[AMES by the grace of God king of England Scotland 
ffraunce and Ireland defendo r of the faith &c : To o r 
high Treasurer, and Admirall of England, and to all 
other o r Admiralls Viceadmiralls Captaines and others 
seruinge vpon the Sea. And to all Maiors Sheriff? Constables 
Customers Comptrollers Surveyed Searchers, Keeps of o r Port?, 
Creekf and PassadgC and to all others o r Officers Ministers, and 
subiectf whatsoeu 1 to whome in that behalfe it shall or may 
appteyne and to eu r y of them greetinge. Wheareas in the first 
Session of o r Parliament holden at Westminster, in the first yeare 
of o r Reigne of England ffraunce and Ireland and of Scotland the 
seaven and thirteth one Acte 3 was made intituled an Acte for the 
well garbling of Spices wheareby it was ordeyned & enacted that 
from and after the last day of September then next ensueing the 
end of that Session of Parliam te , All spices wares druggf and 
other m r chandizes garbleable, that is to say Pepp, Cloues, Mace, 
Nutmeggf, Cynamon, Ginger Long Pepper, Wormeseedf 4 , 
Comynseedf , Annyseedf , Colyanderseedf , Bynny pepp Almond? 

1 5th Jan., 1606/7. 

2 The original grant is preserved among the India Office "Parchment Records" 
(No. 3) ; it is, however, in so damaged a condition that it has not been found practic- 
able to collate it with the present document. A Minute of the License is in the 
Public Record Office (Grant Bk. t Jac. I., p. 28). For the petition which led to its 
issue, see page 205. 

8 i Jac. I., c. 19. 

4 Semen Contra, Semen Cinae, Semen Sanctum, Santonin, the seeds of Artemisia 
maritima (Afsantin-^a^ivBtov^-ul-bahar), A. valhiana, A. judiaca and other species of 
Artemisia. It would seem (see note 2 on next page) that wormseed was at this time 
occasionally included under the term " Zedoary." 



200 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Dat Galles Gumes of all sortf and kindf garbleable Spikenard 
Galingath 1 Turmericke, Setweth 2 Cassia fistula Gynny Pepp 

1 Galangal (Kulanjan), the tuberous root of Alpinia Galanga and other species of 
Alpinia (see note 2). 

2 Obviously the copyist's corruption of Setwall, the " cetewale " and " setewale " of 
Chaucer and " setuale " of Spenser, corruptions of the Low Latin zedoaria, a corruption 
of the Arabo-Persian djedwar, a denomination which in the mediaeval commerce of 
Europe with India originally included Zedoaria rotunda, the tuber of Curcuma 
Zedoaria, Zedoaria longa, the tuber of Curcuma Zerumbet, Zedoaria flava, or Cassu- 
manar, the tuber of Zingiber Cassumanar, and Zerumbet, the tuber of Zingiber 
Zerumbet, the last trade denomination being a corruption of the Arabo-Persian 
zurumbad. Chaucer and Spenser, however, by Setwall probably meant either the 
" Common Valerian " (Valeriana officinalis) or " Spanish Valerian " (V. fyrenaica) ; and 
our English botanists of the seventeenth century also included under the term the 
drug Spikenard, the sumbul or jatamansi of the bazaars of India, the fleshy rhizome 
of the "Himalayan Valerian" (Nardostachys Jatamansi), the vapdos Triort'/cog of the 
Gospels of St. Mark and St. John, where the qualifying adjective (meaning in Greek 
"faithful," "genuine") obviously came to be attached to the substantive vapdos 
(the Persian nard from the Sanskrit nar, "a perfume") from its phonetic resem- 
blance to the Sanskrit pisita, "fleshy." As, however, " Spikenard " is separately 
denominated in the previous line of the present list of drugs, while "Setweth" is 
named after "Galingath" and "Turmericke," it is clear that in the early trade of 
the Company, Setwall still continued to stand for one or more of the varieties of 
Zedoary above enumerated. 

" A chambir had he in that hostillerye 

Alone, withouten eny compaignye, 

Ful fetisly i-dight with herbes soote, 

And he himself as swete as is the roote 

Of lokorys, or eny cetewale." 

Chaucer : Milleres Tale. 
" Ther was eke wexing many a spice, 

As clowe-gelofre, and lycorice, 

Gyngevre, and greyn de Parys, 

Canelle, and setewale of prys." 

Chaucer : Rontaunt of the Rose. 
"Embathed Balme and chearfull Galingale 

Dull Poppy and drink quenching Setuale." 

Spenser: Muiopotmos. 

" Went forth when May was in her prime (O : S :) 
To get sweet Setywale." 

Drayton : Pastorals, EC : IV. 

See also John Gerarde's Herball or Generall Historic of Plantes (London, 1633) ; and 
the Nomenclator of Adrianus Junius (London, 1585), in which the entry regarding 
Zedoary is: "Zadura vulgo Zedoaria. Cretonart. Zedoarie, or [as some say] 



TtiE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 461 

Seme 1 Barbaries 2 Rise 8 Erius 4 Stavisaker 5 , Calamus ffemyquicke 6 
Cassia Lignum Graines 7 Carrowaie seedf and all other spices 
druggf wares and other m r chandizes that had beene vsuallie 
garbled, or ought to be garbled clensed seuered sorted or deuided 
in the Cittie of London and the libties thereof, should for the 
ffees vsuallie allowed in that behalfe be sufficientlie clensed seuered 
garbled and deuided, and afterwardf setled 8 by the Garbler 
therevnto appointed for the tyme being, or by his sufficient 
Deputie or Deputies servant or servant^ before that the same or 
any pte thereof should be sould vpon payne of fforfecture of all 
and eu r y such spices druggf wares or other m r chaundizes, or the 
value thereof w ch should be sould as by the said Acte more at 
lardge appeth. And whereas the true intent and meaneing of the 
said Acte was that none of the said spices druggf wares and 
m r chandizes brought into this Realme should be vttered or sould 
to the end to be vsed in meatf drinkf , or other needfull occasions 
amongst o r subiectf w th in this Realme before such tyme as the 
same were sufficientlie clensed seuered garbled and deuided as is 

wormseede." In Florio's Worlde of Wordes (London, 1598), it is : "Zedoaria, the 
herbe Zederie, or wormeseede;" and in Skinner's Etymologicon (London, 1671): 
" Setwall, Valeriana sic dicta vel quod seratur circa Muros, vel quod Muros sponte 
sua obsideat." The term "Cretonart" in the above quotation from the Nomenclator 
of Adrianus Junius I find again only in Vansleb's Present State of Egypt (London, 
1678), where it follows Ginger, in the list of druggists' roots exported from Egypt in 
the seventeenth century. 

1 Senna, the leaves of Cassia elongata, C. Senna, and other species of Cassia : or 
possibly Radix Chinae, the root of Smilax China, enumerated by Vansleb under the 
name of "Sine," in French "Squine," among the exports from Egypt in the seven- 
teenth century. 

2 " Barbaries " may here stand for Aleppo Senna (Cassia obovata), as in the case of 
Barbary Wormseed ; but most probably the drug indicated is the extract (rusut) of 
the wood of Berberis Lycium and other speties of Barberry. 

3 Rice. 

4 Perhaps erindi, the seeds of Ricinus communis, the Common Castor Oil plant. 

5 The seeds (hub-ul-jabhul) of Delphinium Staphisagria, Stavesacre. 
8 Fennugreek, the seeds of Trigonella Foenum Gracum. 

7 Grains of Paradise ("greyn de Parys" in the extract from the Romaunt of the 
Rose quoted above), called also "Attare" and " Malaguetta Pepper," the seeds of 
Amomum Grana Pamdisi, A. gmndiflovum, A. xanthioides, and other species of 
Amomum; and Cardamoms, the seeds of Alpinia, now Elettaria Cardamomum, are 
sometimes included under the term. 

3 " Sealed " in the Act, which is evidently the proper reading. 



202 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

aforesai[d] And the true meaneing of the same Acte did not in 
any wyse extend to the clensing seu r ing garbling and deuiding of any 
such of the said spices druggf wares and m r chandizes, as should be 
transported out of this Realme in such sorte as they were brought 
into the same And wheareas yt is found that by some generall 
wordf that passed in the said Acte, no wares marchandizes or 
Comodities that are garbleable being brought into this Realme can 
be sould betweene m r chaunt and m r chaunte vngarbled to the intent 
to transporte the same into the ptf? beyond the seas but the seller 
therof by the strict ire of the said statute shall thereby be in 
danger to forfect all the said spices druggf wares and marchan- 
dizes \v^ he shall soe sell vngarbled. And wheareas o r loueing 
subiectf the Gou r no r and Companie of m r chaunt of London 
trading into the East Indies, haue crediblie informed vs that they 
haueing latelie brought from the said East Indies into this o r 
Realme a greate quantitie of spice and other wares and comodities 
garbleable more then can be vttered and spent w tb in this Realme 
in many yeares, & haue been therefore humble suiters to vs 
to haue o r lycense to sell some of the same spices in grosse to 
other m r chauntf to be transported in grosse into diu r s place beyond 
the seas w ch by reason of the said Statute they make doubt to doo 
w tb out o r spetiall lycense in that behalfe, w ch favo r if we graunte them 
not, and that verie speedelie other m r chantf of other nacons will 
happilie prevent them in serueing those places w tb such like 
spices & soe theirs shall lye vpon their handf to their greate 
losse and damadge. Know ye therefore that we gratiouslie 
tendring the welfare and Comoditie of o r said loueing subiectf 
the Gou r no r and Company of m r chantr? of London trading into 
the East Indies. And to the end they may be the better 
enabled to maineteyne and Continue their trade and traffique 
in the said East Indies of o r espetiall grace c r teine knowledg 
and mere motion haue geuen and graunted & by theis present C 
for vs o r heires and Successo" doe giue and graunt full and free 
lifctie licence power & authoritie vnto the said Gou r no r & Com- 
pany of m r chauntf of London tradinge into the East Indies 
and to their Successo that it shall & may be lawfull to & for 
them & eu r y of them hereafter to vtter sell and put to sale 
any of the said spices druggf wares and m'chandizes by them 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 203 

or any of them alreadie brought from any ptf of the said 
East Indies into this Realme or any gte thereof in whole 
packes sackes or Cask vnbroken vngarbled & not clensed seu r ed 
sorted or deuided to any m r chant or m r chaunt aswell o r naturall 
borne subiectf as Aliens Benicens 1 or Straungers that shall w th in 
the space of 3 monnethes next after the date thereof transporte 
the same in whole packf sackf or Caskf vnbroken as aforesaid 
into any the ptf beyond the Seas w th out any damadge losse 
forfecture and penaltie against the said Gou r no r & Company 
of m r chauntf of London trading into the East Indies, or against 
any of them by vs o r heires or successo, or to o r or their vse 
and behoofe to be had lost forfected or incurred or w tb out any 
manner let interrupcon or disturbance of any other pson or 
psons whatsoeu r The said statute or any other thinge to the 
Contrarie thereof in any wise not w th stan ding. And we doe 
further for vs o r heires and Successo of o r like especiall grace 
certeine knowledge and mere mocon giue and graunte full free 
and lawfull power & authoritie vnto all and eu r y m r chant and 
m r chantf whatsoeu 1 ' aswell o r naturall borne subiectf as Aliens 
Denizens & straungers that they and eu r y or any of them shall 
and lawfullie may bargaine for buy receiue and take of the 
said Gou r no r and Company of marchauntf of London trading 
into the East Indies and their Successo for the tyme being, 
or of any of them, any of the said spices druggf wares and 
m r chandizes in whole sack? packf or Caskf not broken as 
aforesaid vngarbled and not clensed seu r ed sorted or deuided 
& the same spices Druggf wares & m r chandizes soe fcgayned 
for, bought receiued & taken & eu r y gte and pcell thereof 
in such and the same sorte as the same shall be bought 
in whole packf whole sackf or in Caske not broken up w th in 
this o r Realme of England or any pte thereof after the same 
shall be soe sould by the said Gou r no r and Companie of 
m r chaunt of London trading into the East Indies as is aforesaid 
shall and may lawfullie and freelie w th in the space of three 
monnethes next followinge after the said date thereof transporte 
carrie or Convey out of any porte haven Creeke or other place of 

An error for " Denizens." 



20 4 FIRST LETTER BOOK Of 

lading or vnlading w th in o r Realme of England into any the partf 
beyond the seas and theare at their free wills liberties and 
pleasures vtter sell distribute and dispose the same to their or any 
of their most proffitt Comoditie and aduantage w th out any 
damadge losse forfecture or penaltie against them or any of them 
by vs o r heires or Successo 18 or to o r or their vse and behoofe to 
be had lost forfected or incurred and w th out any manner lett 
interrupcon or disturbance of any other pson or psons whatsoeu r , 
The said statute or any other thinge to the Contrarie thereof in 
any wise notw th standinge Paying vnto vs o r heires and Successo 
from time to tyme all and eu r y such Customes subsidies, somes of 
money, and other duties as are or ought to be aunsweared and 
paid vnto vs o r heires and successo" for or by reason of the 
transportacon of any of the said spices druggf wares and m r chan- 
dizes so to be transported as aforesaid. 

Provided alwaies neu r thelesse that if there shall not be from 
tyme to tyme and at all tymes hereafter sufficient quantitie or 
store of the said spices druggf wares and Merchandizes to be 
garbled clensed seuered sorted and deuided left and being w th in 
this o r Realme of England & to be vsed spent and occupied by o r 
loueing subiectf w th in the same Realme in their meatf drinkf and 
other needfull occasions, and the sane to be sould vttered and put 
to sale to any of o r said loueinge subiectf at reasonable and 
indifferent prices That then and from thence forth aswell the 
said Gou r no r and Companie of m r chant of London tradinge into 
the East Indies shall cease and forbeare to sell and vtter any of 
the said spices druggf wares and m r chandizes vngarbled as is 
aforesaid as alsoe the said m r chant and others shall cease and 
forbeare to buy receiue and take the same vngarbled any thing 
before in theis present^ to the Contrarie in any wyse notw th - 
standinge. 

Although expresse mencon of the cleire yearelie value, or 
c r teynetie of the premisses or of any of them or of any other 
guift or grauntf by vs or any of o r progenitors to the said 
Gou r no r and Company of m r chantc heretofore made in those 1 
presentf is not made, or any statute Acte Ordinance pvision 
proclamacon or restrainte to the contrarie thereof made ordeyned 

> These? 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY, 



205 



or prouided or any other thing cause or matter whatsoeu 1 to the 
contrarie notw th standing. In witnes whereof we haue caused 
theis o r ires to be made Patent^. Witnes o r selfe at Westminster 
the ix th day of August in the fourth yeare of o r reigne of England 
ffraunce & Ireland & of Scotland the XI th . 1 

32 Ere de priuato sigillo. Tho : Ravenscrofte. 



1606 

To the kingf most excellent ma tie : 

The humble peticon 2 of yo r ma^ faithfull Subiectf the m r chant 
of London trading [into] the East Indies. 

AY it please yo r sacred ma tie : to be informed that in the 
first year of yo r most happie reigne there passed an 
Acte against vttering of c r teine spicf vngarbled vsed 
in meatc drinkf and other needfull occasions amongest 
Subiectf whereby greate deceite hurte & damadge 
happened to such as bought and vsed the same : 

. 

ffor remedie whereof, the said Acte was purposely 

J 




yo r 

Humblie praying that 

yo r matie wiibe pleased 

to grant them a non 

obitante vpon the sta- made & not for garbling such spicf as should be 

tuteforgarbhngmade ' * 

transported out of yo r Realmes But by some 



e^ fol 



such spices & other generall worde in the said Acte it is comprized 



m'chandize vngarbled 
as shall be transported 
out of the Realme ac- 



as shaii be transported con trarie to the true meaiieing thereof that noe 



cording to their chart' 
wthout danger of 
lawe : And for yo r 
mates better satis- 



comodities brought into this Realme garbleable 
cann be sould betweene m r chaunt and m r chaunt 
vngarbled to thintent the same may be trans- 
Lbie" 8 * a a cU ? nTto ported into fforreine ptf? , but the seller thereof, by 
SuteVey humlfie the strict tr e of the said statute is in danger to 
SLonrtereofma"; forfect all the said spicf he shall soe sell 

Now soe it is most Excellent ma tie : 



be by yo r highnes re- 
ferred to the Lo : 



vngarbled. 



1606. 



2 The loss of the second volume of Court Minutes prevents us from tracing the 
events that led up to this petition ; but the reasons for it are explained very clearly 
in the document itself, and the result of the application is shewn by the preceding 
entry, which is that of the letters patent issued in compliance with the Company's 

prayer. 



ao6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

i a h nd f &th S eLo?d C E h n e ?f That y ' m'chantt of London trading [into] the 
East Indies > haueing latelie brought from thence 
into this kingdome a greate quantitie of spices 
more then this land can vtter in manie yeares, or 
the Garblers can garble in any due tyme fitt for the sale thereof : 
They are desirous to sell some pte thereof vngarbled to be 
transported beyond the Seas as by Charter they are allowed : 
But by reason of the said statute they make doubt to doe the 
same, for avoieding of danger By meanes whereof the shall be 
much inabled 1 to furnish the like voyadge againe in any 
convenient tyme the w ch will proue hurtfull vnto yo r ma tle in yo r 
Customes and to yo r people, & a greate discouradgm* to yo r 
m r chauntf to proceed in the same Trade, whoe in verie truth, 
hartelie doe desier aboundantlie to supplie the wantf of the land 
w th the best of their spices, at reasonable ratf & not to haue any 
of the same spent w th in yo r Realme, but what shall be garbled 
according to the said statute : But those onelie to be exempt 
that by way of m r chandize shalbe sent beyond the Seas. May it 
therefore please yo r sacred ma tie : That for yo r highnes better 
informacon what was the true intent of the said statute, to referr 
the Consideracon thereof to the Lo : cheefe Justice of England & 
the Lo : cheefe Justice of the comon plees & such other learned 
in the Law as yo r ma tie : shall thinke fitt. And if they vpon due 
examinacon thereof shall soe hold it reasonable. That yo r ma tie 
would then be pleased to graunte vnto yo r Peticioners a non 
obstante vpon the said statute for selling of spices & other 
m'chandize vngarbled, soe as the spices be transported, & not 
retailed or spent w th in the Realme. And as most bound we pray 
God giue yo r ma tie : a long & most happie reigne ou r vs. 



A reference from his ma* 6 : 

The kf ma tie is pleased that the Lo : Threr & Earle of 
Salisburie shall vpon conference w th the twoe LL cheefe Justices 
consider whether this desier of the m r chantf be against [the] true 
intent of the statute, or noe : & whether it be w th out p r iudice to 

1 The sense seems to require "disabled." 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 207 

the Realme that such a non obstante vpon the said statute be 
graunted & if they finde it reasonable to be done that they giue 
order to his ma'f Atturney to drawe such a booke as shall be 
requisite 

Tho: Lake. 



I606. 1 

To the right Ho : the Lordf of his ma* 68 most 
Ho: privie Councell. 

The Peticon of the Comp : of m r chantf trading into the 
East Indies humblie shewing. 

HAT wheares by o r Charter we are lycensced to carrie 
for the said Indies eu r y voyadge to the some of 3OOoo u 
of all such fforreine Coines as we shall bring into this 
kingdome soe as 6ooo u theareof be heare first Coyned : 
Now soe it is right Ho : that the Companie haueing made twoe 
voyadg^ w th retournes verie comodious to his ma tie in his 
Customes and his Realmes, & haue alsoe now alredie sent forth a 
3 voyadg & are in a redines to sett forth a 4 th voyadge, aswell for 
those plac^ where they haue fornTlie beene as for discou r y of 
furder trade in those pt, & are desirous to manadge & carrie 
their trade as neare as they can rather by the transportacon of o r 
Natiue Comoditie [s] then by vsing the benefitt granted them for 
transportacon of fforreine coine as aforesaid : But thingc soe 
stand that as yett noe trade cann be theare driuen w th out some 
moneys, & espetiallie such fforreine coines as they are acquainted 
w th all. In consideracon whereof & forasmuch as in o r c r teine 
knowledge diu r s of o r Company haue latelie brought into this 
Realmes greate somes of fforreine Coines farr exceeding that w ch 

1 This date is evidently wrong, even if it is to be read 1606/7. The ships of the 
Third Voyage did not sail till March, 1606/7, and preparations for the Fourth were not 
commenced until the following May. Taken in connection with the related docu- 
ments, it seems more likely that the present petition should be assigned, at the 
earliest, to the autumn of 1607. 




208 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

we now requier : We humblie beseech that by yo r ho : good 
favo his ma tie may be moued to vouchsaffe vs his highnes 
graunte for transportacon in theis o r shipps for theast Indies the 
some of I5ooo u onelie in forreine coines, w th out new coyning any 
pte thereof: & the rather in reguard y* forasmuch as we haue 
form r lie had in the first voyadge, much difftcultie and losse in 
such moneys as weare heare coyned by reason those people ar 
altogether vnacquainted w th the stamp of this kingdome, beside 
the stay of o r shipps now for coyning thereof wilbe to thutter 
ou r throw of the voyadge. And we as most bound beseech god to 
geue yo r Lo ps : all health and happines. 




To the right Ho: the Lordf of his ma ties : most 
Ho: priuie councell. 

The Peticon of the Company of m r chauntf trading into 
the East Indies humblie shewinge. 

| HAT whearas of late vpon o r humble Peticon it pleased 
yo r lops : for the reasons therein mencioned to 
conceiue it fitt we should be .pmitted to transporte 
I5OOO U in fforreine Coines of those 30000^ graunted vs 
by o r Charter, & that w th out new coyning any pte thereof. The 
w ch some of I5ooo u vpon better advice & Consideracon of o r 
intencon furder to discou r & enlardge that trade, we vnderstand 
will not be be sufficient (notw th standing the comodities we now 
carrie of dyvers sortf) to manadge the same w th good order, & for 
retournes in this present voyadge. We therefore humblie pray 
that by yo r honorable good favo rs his ma tie may be now moued to 
vouchsaffe vs his highnes graunte for transportacon in theis o r 
ships for the East Indies the some of 2oooo u in forreine Coines in 
place of the said isooo 11 w th out new coyning any pte thereof. 
And as most bound we pray god giue you all health & happines. 







THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 209 

JHEAREAS 1 we haue hired diu r s saylo rs to goe in o 1 ' 
voyadg now intended for the East Indies who haue 
not onelie subscribed to o r Bookf, to pforme the 
same but alsoe haue receiued wagf of vs & some 
ymprest moneys, and yet we may doubt (as in form r tyme hath 
beene vsed) that aswell before the shipps were 
such tayier e s n as n shaii readie to dcpte, as at their depture some of such 

goe away. , , . . , , 

a nomber may be missing not onelie w* a o r 
losse, but alsoe tending to the ou r throwe of the wholle voyadge : 
ffor prevencon thereof we humblie pray that a warrant may be 
graunted, or some convenient meanes vsed for app r hencon & 
ponishm te of such as are or shall goe away or depte & absent 
them selues from their placf and service in this present voyadg 
after they shall be hired and agreed w th all. 



To the Lord High Admirall of England 

HE ARE AS we are informed that there now is a presse 
for men to be sent downe to Chatham & we are in 
doubt that thereby o r men appointed for bringing in 
one of o r shipps into the docke at Debtford may be 
pressed thither, the w cl1 will proue an exceeding hindrance vnto 
the voyadge w ch we are now in hand to prepare 

A peticon not to J 

presse men from or f or theast Indies. We humblie pray that yo r Lo? : 
wilbe pleased to graunte yo r warrant that o r men 
may not be taken from vs in this tyme of necessitie : & soe much 
the rather as the omitting of this oportunitie of bringing the 
said shipp now into the Docke may be the ou r throw of o r said 
intended voyadge. 



1 No date or superscription is given, but from the almost literal agreement of the 
wording with the resolution recorded in the Court Minutes of 23rd Jan. 1606/7 (see 
page no, note), it seems probable that the present document is a copy of the appli- 
cation that was then ordered to be made to the Judge of the Admiralty, or, if 
necessary, to the Lord High Admiral. 

P 





2 io FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

To the kinge most excellent ma" 6 : 1 

[HAT wheareas now after a longe & chardgable voyadge 
such retournes as we made from thence is for the 
most pte pepp, & in such quantitie as we shall not be 
able to vent the same neither at home nor abroade, 
but w th intolerable losse, and discouradgm* to follow that trade 
for restraint of bring. an Y furder vnlesse Restraint be made that noe 
ing in of pepper pep ^ j^ brought hither from any the pt beyond 

the Seas till we shall be able to haue made sale of o re , and soe 
much the rather for that how willing soeu r we shalbe to afford 
the same at any lowe ratf, yet the Netherlanders studious how 
to wearie vs out of that trade by prevencons in o r sales & 
retournes both in theast Indies and heare at home, will 
soe watch their times as they will much hurte vs either by 
affording to o r People bad pepp better Cheepe, to beate downe 
the prize of o r better pepp w th the hurte of the comons of this 
land whoe buie the same for their owne spendinge, or by some 
other deuicf , as by experience we daylie finde. Now forasmuch 
as we will be eu r readie to afford o r best pepp at such ratf as 
shall be reasonable not exceeding ij 8 a pounde we most humblie 
beseech yo r sacred ma tie : of yo r gratious clemencie in con- 
sideracon hereof, to vouchsaffe vs yo r most Princelie warrant for 
restrayning aswell yo r ma^ subiectf, as any other to bring any 
pepp into any yo r ma^ dominions from any forreine pt for the 
space of yeares next ensueing vnles it be by vs from theast 
Indies. And we as most bound beseech thalmightie God to giue 
yo r ma tie : a longe and happie reigne ou r vs. 



1 The date of this petition may be fixed as some time in November, 1609. There 
are several references in the Court Minutes to the negotiations on the subject, which 
resulted in the issue, on the 30th November of that year, of a Royal Proclamation 
inhibiting the importation of pepper from foreign parts by any other persons than 
those of the East India Company, and limiting the price at which they should sell it 
to two shillings and sixpence per pound. [See Cal. S.P., East Indies, 1513-1616, pages 
196-199, and The Voyage of Sir Henry Middleton (Hakluyt Society, 1855), Appendix, page 
43, where the proclamation is printed at length.] It appears that the Company had 
offered to pay a tax of sixpence per pound on all pepper sold under this monopoly, 
and this no doubt had a great influence in obtaining for them the desired favour, 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 211 

To the right ho: the lordf of his ma*? most 
honor priuie Councell. 

The peticon of the Company of East India m r chant humblie 
shewing vnto yo r Lo ps : 1 

[HAT wheareas we haue alredie w th o r greate chardge & 
Adventure setled a trade in the East Indies verie 
pffittable for this comon wealth & for furder enlardgm* 
thereof, are even now prepareing of shipps & other 
puicons w th good hope that the same will proue dailie more & 
more Comodious aswell for ventinge of o r natiue 

That none but y e .-, .... r f . . . . 

company may trade Comodities, as for retournes of thingf vene need- 
to theast Indies. r ,, - . . , , . , 

full for this o r land at reasonable ratf . 

Soe it is right Hono: that ptelie by reason of S r Edw: 
Michelbornes hard dealing^ in the East Indies 2 by surprising the 
ships & goodf of some such as we haue & of others whome we 
intend to haue trade w th all, vpon p r tence they ar Infidells : & ptlie 
for that there is some reporte that theare are others suiters alsoe 
for Commission to doe the like: Not onelie the most of the 
cheefest of the Companie are discouradged to Adventure any 
more: but alsoe such as haue alreadie sett downe their Adven- 
tures begynn to drawe backe whereby vnlesse some good course 
be taken herein, that trade will whollie decay w th the intolerable 
hurte & dishono r of this o r land & nation. 

In consideracon whereof & forasmuch as we giueing ou r the 
trade yt will remaine whollie in the handf of the Hollenders: 
whoe as they haue endevored to bringe the same to passe by diu r s 
kinde of meanes: soe it is not to be doubted but that they will 
then sell such thingf, as now are, or shalbe brought thence at 
what Ratf them please. Wee humblie beseech: That by yo r 
honorable good meanes some convenient course may be entred 
into, to take away theis & such like obstacles as may hinder soe 
good & honorable an endevo r : the w ch wilbe easilie effected, if 
that from hencforth noe way be geven to any such Comission 
and that by some publick edict, all others his ma^ subiectf be 

1 1606 or 1607. See note, page 134. 

P I 



ai2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

phibited from any manner of trade or dealing in those pt , during 
TO repeii force by the time of o r graunte. And further more right 
ho: it would be agreater incouradgm* vnto vs 
cherefullie to pceed herein yf that for o r better saffitie in theis 
doubtfull occasions, his ma tie by yo r ho: good favo" would alsoe 
be moued to graunte vs Comission to repell force by force if the 
same be offered vs. As alsoe that we may w tb out doubt of any 
lett or danger of the statute to send w th o r ships soe much forreine 
Coine as shall be needfull for vs, the w ch wilbe now much lesse 
That we may carry t* 1611 formerlie we haue done by vertue of o r 
forreine come Charter And furder that in some convenient 

sorte the states of the Low Countries may be alsoe dealt w th all : 
That notw th standing their Peoples contencons w th the Portugalls 
whoe should haue all the trade in those t we may freelie trade 
w th them in all placf theare as neighbo and ffreindf w th out 
excepcon. And &c : 



A peticon to the Lord ThTer. 1 




declareing vnto yo r Lo p : That amongst other 
Comodities now brought from thence we finding the 
Nutmeggf of such evill Condicon as they are for the 
greater pte Rumps & noe Nutmeggf we thought good 
to make o r entries thereof in the Custome house accordinglie 
The w ch entries the ffarmo rs altogether seekinge 

The difference for 

entrie of the Nut- their owne priuate proffitt w th out hauemg any 

meges to be mediated. r i 

reguard to the qualhtie of the same or of o r longe 
and chardgable voyadge & Adventure refuce to take : vrging vs to 
enter them all for Nutmeggf the w ch paith more then twice the 
Custome of Rumps, whereas in verie deed 2 pt theareof are 
Rumps & that of the worst sorte : The w ch course seemeth not 
onelie against the rat? sett downe for paym* of Custome but alsoe 
against all comon reason w th o r intolerable iniurie. wherefor 
we humble beseech: that by yo r LQP S : good meanes the matter 

1 Probably 1606. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 21$ 

may be soe mediated as that neither we nor [the] ffarmo r8 may 
haue any Iniurie or losse herein. And as most bound we pray 
god giue you all health and happines. 




To the Right ho : the Lordf of his ma*f : most ho : priuie 
Councell. 1 

I HAT whereas we haue w th o r greate chardge sought all 
possible meanes for setling & inlardgeing of a trade 
in the East Indies, aswell for venting o r Natiue 
Comodities, as for retourne of thingf comodious & 
needfull for this o r Realme at reasonable ratf . Soe it is Right 
ho : That even now when we were in a course 

Touching S p Edw: 

Micheibornes fact furder to enlardge the same we vnderstand by 

comitted in theast <* 

tres & Certificate from o r ffacto r8 at Bantam. 
That S r Edward Michelborne hath taken & spoiled some of o r 
freindf there, whereby not onelie the vtter ou r throwe of the 
whole trade is much indangered : but alsoe the saffetie of o r men 
& goodf remayneing in those pt are greatlie to be feared. 2 
In tender consideracon whereof we humblie beseech y* by yo r 
ho : good? meanes, some speedie course may be taken herein 
for o r saffetie either by sequestracon of the goodf w ch the said 
S r Edw: Michelborne hath now brought home, or otherwyse, 
as in yo r hono : discrecons shall be thought fitt : vntill vpon 
better informacon the estate and saffetie of o r ffacto" & goodf 
theare may be furder knowne. ffor at the writeing of the said 
ires now come, noe c r teintie of the takeing of the Guzarat & 
Cheny lunck w ch the said S r Edw : now confesseth : nor some 
other things w ch are heare now reported, was then there acted, 
or come to knowledge. 



1 Undated, but apparently soon after Sir Edward Michelborne' s return to England 
in July, 1606. 

2 See page 134. 




FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

To y e Right ho : y e Lord? of his ma 1 ? : most honorable 
priuie Councell. 1 

| HAT wheareas by o r Charter we are lycenced to carrie 
for the said Indies eu r y voyadge to the some of 
30OOO U of all such forreigne Coines as we shall bring 
into this kingdome soe as 6ooo u thereof be heare first 
coyned. Now soe it is right hono : That the Company haueing 
made twoe voyagf w th retournes verie comodious 

A peticon for trans- . . . . . . . _ o i T- i j 

portacon of moneys to his ma tle i in his Customes & his Realmes, and 
haue alsoe now alredie sent forth a 3 voyadge & 
are in a readines to sett forth a 4 th voyadge aswell for those 
places where they haue form r lie beene as for discou r y of furder 
trade in those ptf , and are desierous to manadge & carrie their 
trade as neare as they cann, rather by the transportacon of o r 
natiue comodities, then by vsing the benefitt graunted them for 
transportacon of forreine Coine as aforesaid : But thingf soe 
stand that as yet noe trade can be there driuen, w th out some 
moneys, & espetiallie such fforreine coines as they are acquainted 
\v th all. In Consideracon whereof & forasmuch as in o r c r teine 
knowledge diu r s of o r Company haue latelie brought into this 
Realme greate somes of forreine Coines, far exceeding that w ch 
we now requier : we humblie beseech that by yo r ho : good favo r3 
his ma tie may be moued to vouchsaffe vs his highnes graunte for 
transportacon in theis o r ships for theast Indies the some onelie 
of i8ooo u in forreigne coines w th out new coyning any pte thereof: 
and the rather in reguard that forasmuch as we haue form r lie 
had in the first voyadge much difncultie and losse in such moneys 
as weare heare coyned by reason those people are altogether 



1 This document is somewhat of a puzzle. It is identical with that given on page 
207, with the important exception that 18,000 is named as the limit, instead of 
/i 5, ooo. It might be assumed that there were three petitions in all, viz. one for 
15,000, another for 18,000, and a third for 20,000; but this supposition is 
negatived by the fact that the petition for liberty to carry out 20,000 (page 208) 
mentions only one previous petition, viz. that for 15,000. A possible explanation 
is that the present petition was drafted but not presented. 




THE EAST ItfDIA COMPANY. 215 

vnacquainted w th the stampe of this kingdome besidf the staie of 
o r ships, now for coyning thereof wilbe to the vtter ou r throw of 
this voyadge. And we &c : 



To the kingf most excellent ma tie : l 

| HAT by Charter we are lycensed to carrie for the said 
Indies in eu r y voyadge to the some of 3oooo u of all 
such forreine Coines or siluer as we shall bringe into 
this Realme soe as doocP thereof be heare first coyned. 
But forasmuch as in the first voyadge to those pt we had much 
ffor transportacon of Mfficultie & losse in such moneys as were heare 
then coyned those People beinge vnacquainted 
w th the stampe of this kingdome : in reguard Thereof we haue eu r 
since (vpon o r peticon) beene lycenced to transporte such forreine 
Coines as we haue sent thither w th out new coyning any p te of the 
same. In consideracon whereof & for that in o r c r teine knowledge 
diu r s of o r Company haue latelie brought into this Realme 
greate somes of fforreine Coines farr exceeding that we shall 
now haue occasion to vse, & we are desireous to manadge o r trade 
as nere as wee cann rather by transportacon of o r Native comodities 
then by vsing the benefitt granted vs for transportacon of fforreine 
Coines as aforesaid we humblie beseech that yo r ma tie wilbe now 
pleased vpon this o r peticon to vouchsaffe vs yo r highnes grante 
as heretofore for transportacon of such forreine Coines or siluer 
as we shall send in the shipps now preparing for the said Indies 
w th out new coyning any pte thereof, & the rather for that all the 
moneys & siluer w dl we shall soe now send thither will be vnder 
the some of 20000" in the whole. And we &c : 



1 To be dated about December, 1607 (see the letter on the next page). In the 
manuscript of this petition there are several interlineations and corrections in another 
hand ; while the words printed in italics are underlined, and were probably omitted. 




3i6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OP 

To the Right Ho : thearle of Salisburie principall Secretarie to 

his ma tie : 

The peticon of the Companie of m r chauntf trading into the 
East Indies humblie shewing. 1 

| HAT wheareas in lanuarie last it pleased his ma tie : to 
vouchsafe vs his highnes tres in o r behalfe to diu r s 
Princes in theast Indies 2 the w ch ires were then sent by 
the conveyance of o r shipps we prepared at that tyme 
to goe for those part? : Now soe it is right ho : That we haueing 
TO the LO: of sans- noe me anes as yet to knowe whether the same 
hr s ri M f ^ P Tres r anf ^^ be deliu r ed or by any Accident miscaried or 
^^"aeco^l deteyned in o r mens hand? we then sent thither. 
the th 3 e v f S e ge lr t e o S And being shortlie to send other shipps for furder 
be ' trade and discou'y of those kingdomes. We 
humblie pray in reguard thereof That yo r lo? : will be a meanes 
vnto his ma tie : in o r behalfe That his highnes will be now againe 
pleased to vouchsaffe vs his most gratious tres vnto the said 
Princes to the like effect as before w th some addicon as shalbe 
fitt, together w th his ma ties Comission to such of o r ffacto rs as shall 
goe now Principall in this voyadge. And as most bound we pray 
god to giue yo r lor p : many happie yeares. 




12 3 of Decemfc 1607 

| R Tho: lake, I haue mooued his Ma tie :, That wheareas 
by Charter the m r chaunt trading to theast Indies are 
allowed to Carrie forth 30000" of all such fforraine 
Coynes as they shall bring into this Realme So as 
6ooo u thereof be heare first Coined : But forasmuch as in the 
first voiadge to those pt, they affirme that they 

A Ire to Sr Tho: lake i_ j i i , 

from the ID : Thrcr nad much losse, in such money as were then here 

todraweaBillfor his ~ . . - _ , , . 

ma*, signature for Coined, those People being vnacquamted w th the 

1 This should be dated at the end of 1607 or beginning of 1608. 

2 See pages 103-109. 

3 21 at end of letter. 



BAST INDIA COMPANY. 217 

Jooool , stampe of this kingdome : & for that euer "since, 

iwdes n owne h han I d y ^ e y naue t> een licenced vppon humble peticon to 
traunsporte forraine Coines w th out new Coyninge 
any pte of the same And for that as they also affirme diu r s of that 
Companie in their Certaine knowledge haue latelie brought into 
this Realme greate somes of fforraine Coine, farr exceeding that the 
shall now haue occasion to Carrie forth, being as they saie but 
2OOOO 11 , w ch is ioooo u les then by their Charter they may transport. 
In respect of all w ch his ma tie hath pleased most gratiouslie to grant 
their said peticon vppon my humble sute yesterday made vnto 
his h s . Theis ar therfore to pray yo u to cause a Bill redie for 
his matf signiture to be drawne & to present the same to his 
ma tie : accordinglie, giuinge authoritie vnto me to suffer 20000" 
at this tyme, to be traunsported, notw tll standinge that noe pte 
thereof be Coyned here. This 21 of decemfe 1607 

Yo r verie louing freind 
T Dorset. 1 



To the right ho : the Earle of Salisburie principall Secretarie 
to the kinge most excellent ma tie : 

The Peticon of the Gou r no r and Companie of nVchauntf 
tradinge to the East Indies humblie shewinge 

I HAT we haueing w th o r greate chardge & Adventure 
setled a trade in the East Indies we are desirous to 
enlardge the same aswell for the ventinge of o r natiue 
Comodities as for retournes of thing? verie needfull for 
this kingdome at reasonable prices And to that end amongst 
Thesomeofthesaffe d ^ s other Cittics and Countries the w ch we 
conduct is info: 9 8. mte nd god WilHnge to discou r in those pte we 
haue and doe purpose to visitt the Citties of Aden and Moccha at 
the mouth of the red sea & some other placf thereabout^ vnder 
the dominion of the Grand signio r whose tres of saffe Conducte 
would be verie helpfull vnto vs in this behalfe. We humblie 
desier that it will please yo r Lo p : of yo r ho : favo r to vouchsaffe vs 

1 See page 28. For the grant itself, see page 224. 2 i.e. page 266. 





iig FIKST LETTER BOOK OP 

yo r lop 8 tres To S r Thomas Glover Ambassador w th the Grand- 
signio r at Constantinople comanding him in his ma tie8 : name to 
doe his best endevo to obtaine for vs w th expedicon such tres of 
Comendacon & saife Conduct from the Grandsignio r as Con- 
venientlie may be by him procured for vs to the effect of that 
w th in written And as most bound we pray god giue yo r lo p : 
manie happie Yeares. 1 



To the right ho: the Lo: of his ma ties most ho: priuie 
Councell. 2 

|E the Company of the m r chauntf of London tradinge 
theast Indies, most humblie declare vnto yo r Lo ps : 
That we haueing now brought a shipps ladinge of 
Cloues out of those ptf , & findinge the same to be 
very full of dust & garble by the longe Carriadge thereof, we haue 
beene enforced to make o r entries in the Custome howse accor- 
dinglie, otherwyse we should haue beene compelled to pay the 
Custome of Cloues, onelie for dust & garble of small or noe 
valew at all. The w ch manner of entrie, the ffarmo rs (seekinge 
their owne priuate gaine haueing noe reguard to the quallitie of 
the same, or of o r longe & Chargeable voyadge & Adventure) 
refuce to take Vrdginge vs to enter them all for Cloues w th o r 
intolerable iniurie. wherefore o r humble sute is. That by yo r 
loP 3 good meanes, this difference betweene us & the ffarmo r8 may 
be soe mediated, as that neither we, nor they may be iniured 
herein, & that we by noe such offers of hard measure may be any 
way discouraged from that trade soe longe, soe dangerous & 
chardgeable vnto vs, & beneficiall to this kingdome. And we as 
most bound beseech god to giue yo r Lo ps : all health & happines. 

1 See also page 266. The required " pass " was duly obtained by Sir Thomas 
Glover, and was read at the Court Meeting of 5th Oct., 1608. 

2 This petition, resolved on at a Court Meeting of i6th Jan., 1608/9, was read and 
approved on the i8th idem. The cloves to which it relates formed the cargo of Capt. 
David Middleton's ship, the Consent, which had just before arrived in port. The 
dispute appears in the end to have been amicably settled. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 

To the right ho : the Earle of Salisburie Lord 
high Threr of England. 

The humble peticon of the m r chaunt of London tradeing 
into the East Indies. 1 




shewing That in the yeare 1607. w th o r greate 
chardge & Adventure wee sent three shipps for trade 
of m r chandize into those ptf w th order in the way of 
their passadge thither, to make alsoe trade at Aden, 
Surate, & vpon the Coasteof Cambaiayf soe convenientlie and 

1 The following extracts will give an approximate date to the petition, and will at 
the same time explain the circumstances under which it was presented : 

" Lisbon July \*, 1609. Hugh Lee to Thos. Wilson ........... The Hector, a 

" ship of London, trading to Surat, where she arrived in August last, intercepted by 
" four Portugal frigates 3rd October following and taken prize, and the men prisoners 
"for using commerce within their conquest without the King of Spain's licence; 
"value of the goods, a.ooo/; 19 prisoners carried to Goa, three brought to Lisbon, 
" the rest at Goa. Fras. Bucke and Anthony Marlowe, [see note 3, page 120] Walter 
" Romney died on the ship's arrival, prisoners in the Trunk in Lisbon, in great 
" necessity, without apparel, money or other means." Cal. S. P., East Indies, 1513- 
1616, p. 189.) 

[Lee was mistaken in saying that the Hector itself was taken ; he should have said 
two English boats engaged in carrying goods from Surat down the river to the Hector 
at Suhali.] 

" Was alsoe red twoe Ires the one from Anthonie Marlowe thother from ffrancis 
" Bucke the Companies servauntes dated at Lisborne the 15 th of lulie last, Alsoe w th 
" a discourse of their goinge to Surate & of their takeinge & mishapps therein : & of 
" their ymprisonment at Lisborne &c : And their request to the Com panic for their 
" inlardgmt ........ Upon Consideracon whereof ...... it was thought fitt That 

" w th all expedicon the Lord Threr be made acquainted w th theis their Ires, w th 
" request of his honorable favo r to his ma tie : for releefe theirin, for diuers respectes 
" mentioned, As by the peticon in the Register at lardge appereth. And for the effectinge 
" of this busines m r Gou r no r , m r Deputie, m* Harrison, m r lohnson, & m r Hamersley 
11 were intreated w all Convenient speede to repaier vnto the Lord Threr at 
" Salisburie, or where his LoP: may be found, to acquainte his LoP; therew th , & w th 
" what ells they shall thinke fitt for the good & speedie dispatch hereof." (Court 
Minutes, 8th Aug., 1609.) 

" Att this Courte m r Gou r no r declared how kindlie he & those appointed to goe 
" w th him to the Courte were intreated by the Lord Threr whoe promyseth to haue 
" a spetiall care of their sute vnto his Ma tie : & at his LoP s : retourne to London w ch 
" would be w th in Tenn daies, he would giue them further satisfaccon touchinge their 
"sute." (Ibid., i^th Aug., 1609.) 

A further letter on this subject will be found on page 306. It would appear that 
the prisoners were set at liberty at the end of 1610 or the beginning of 1611, through 
the good offices of the English ambassador in Spain. 



220 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

peaceablie they might doe the same, where vpon one of o r said 
shipps comeing to Surate noe way in the Actuall possession of the 
kinge of Spaigne & o r men being there kindlie vsed & suffered to 
trade by those Country people : Notw th standing certaine Portu- 
galls Subiectf of the kinge of Spaigne 1 liueinge at Deu and Goa 
neare to Surate watching their fitt oportunitie w th out any offence 
offered haue vsed such violence against o r men there as they 
haue beene Compelled to flee thence w th the losse not onelie of 
nyneteene men a penasse & alonge Boate but alsoe of a greate 
quantitie of moneys and goodf besidf the danger of the losse of 
o r said shipp w th her adventure for want of a sufficient nomber of 
men to saile her As by diu r3 ires from some of o r people then 
theare taken & since ymprisonned at Lisborne readie to be 
shewed at lardge appeth Our humble suite now is. That in 
reguard we haue beene & at this present now are at a greate 
chardge for buildinge shippinge fitt for this trade the w ch we 
doubt not but will proue very proffitable for this kingdome, aswell 
by venting Comodities vnneedfull as by bringinge home such as 
are needfull for the vse and benefitt of this o r Realme, And that 
theis placf where o r men did now trade is not in the actuall 
possessio[n] of the kinge of Spaigne. That by yo r honorable 
goodf meanes his Ma tie : will be pleased gratiouslie to enter into 
some good course for o r releefe herein aswell for the freeing of o r 
men theare taken, as for satisfaccon of o r losses and wrongf there 
sustayned Contrarie to the Amitie and agreem* betweene his 
ma tie : & the kinge of Spaigne as we humblie vnderstand yt. And 
as most bound we beseech God to giue yo r Lo p : all health and 
happines. 




I HE Condicon 2 of this Obligacon is such That wheareas 
the aboue bounden & 33 is now hired by the aboue 
named Gou r no r and Company of m r chauntf of London 
trading into the East Indies to goe as Pursar of the 
good shipp called the Assencon in this present intended fourth 

1 It will be remembered that at this time Portugal formed part of the dominions 
of the king of Spain. 

2 Compare the bond on page 147. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 221 

The condicon of a voyadge for the said Indies and yet neu r thelesse 

Pursar yt tyeth him J * 

"farther* 8 kath a g ree d t serve the said Gou r no r and Corn- 
in aooii wth suertiesi panic & their successo" as their Couenante servant 
in all and eu r y such their busines & affaires whatsoeu r , w ch 
they or any by them authorized shall thinke fitt to ymploie 
him in, aswell at, in, vnto and from the said East Indies as at 
or in any other place or places whatsoeu r during the space 
of yeares next ensueing the date aboue written, or during 

soe many and such tyme of the said yeares as the said 

Gou r no r and Company or their successo, or such as shall be by 
them authorized shall thinke meete, and for such wagf and 
Consideracon as alredie is agreed vpon betweene the said Gou r no r 
and Company and him the said & i$. as is specified and sett 
downe in the Courte Booke of the said Company. Yf therefore 
the said & 1$ doe from hencforth during all the said terme of 
yeares, or soe longe tyme thereof as the Gou r no r and 
Company or their successo rs shall reteine him in their service well 
trulie and honestlie serve the said Gou r no r and Company their 
successo" and Assignes as their servant in all and eu r y their 
affaires and busines as Pursar or otherwyse whatsoeu r as they or 
such as shalbe by them authorized shall thinke good to ymploie 
him. & doe his best endevo 1 ' for pformaunce & execucon of what 
he shall be sett aboute or ymployed in as aforesaid for the proffitt 
and good service of the said Companie. And according to the 
chardge he is now ymployed in as a Pursar doe keepe a true and 
pfect Accompt by Inventorie of all such provision tackle municon 
furniture, victualls and other necessaries w ch are or shall be 
during the said voyadge brought abourd the said shipp or 
prouided for thuse of the same. And alsoe an Inventorie of all 
the goodf wares & m r chandize as shalbe brought into or 
caried out of the said shipp, aswell belonging vnto the said Com- 
panie as any other. And doe likewise keepe an Inventorie & 
Accompt of the expence & bestowinge of all such provision 
tackle municon furniture and other necessaries w ch shall be brought 
into or caried out of the said shipp & of the remainder thereof. 
And doe at all tymes being therevnto required deliu 1 vp a true 

J These last four words haye been added by another hand, 



222 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Accompt of the same or any other his ymploym 1 to the Gou r no r 
of the said m r chauntf or his Deputie, or to such as shall be 
authorized thereunto by the said Companie: And doe not in 
this or any other voyadge or voyadge of the said Company vse 
any private trade or traffique in m r chandize for his owne propper 
Accompt or Adventure, or Colo r the private trade of any other. 
That then &c: 



[HE Condicon of this obligacon is such. That wheareas 
the aboue bound Samuell Broadshawe 1 is now hired 
by the aboue named Gou r no r & Company of nVchaunt^ 
of London trading into the East Indies & hath agreed 
to serue the said Company & their successo rs as their Couenante 
servant 'in all & eu r y such busines and affaires 

The Condicon of , . 

hiredservantestobe whatsoeu r w cu they or any by them authorized 

imploycd in any place r. 

bound in aoo w th s hall thinke ntt to ymploy him in, aswell at in 

* 




suerties. 



vnto and from the East Indies as at or in any 
other place or places whatsoeu r during the space of yeares 

next ensueing the date aboue written, or during soe many and 
such tyme of the said yeares as the said Gou r no r & 

Company or their successo rs , or such as shalbe by them authorized 
shall thinke meete & for such wages & Consideracon as alreadie 
is agreed vpon betweene the said Gou r no r & Company & him the 

1 Samuel Bradshaw or Broadshawe was engaged by the Company on i5th Dec., 
1607, for service "at home or abroad, as they see fit, at i6l. per annum." On the 
2gth of the following month, he was told off to attend Mr. Rowles, the lieutenant- 
general of the voyage. Later on (26th Feb.) he is referred to as a factor. We learn 
from Purchas that, on the murder in Madagascar of Rowles and his companions, 
Bradshaw took the command of the vessel for the rest of the voyage. It will be 
remembered that on the way home the ship was lost off the coast of Brittany ; and 
as Bradshaw is not mentioned among the survivors, it may be presumed that he went 
down with the ship. 

There is an entry in the Cal. S. P., East Indies, 1513-1616, of a letter from Samuel 
Bradshaw at Tecco, under date roth Feb., 1613 ; but from an examination of the 
document to which it relates (O. C. 104), it seems clear that the date given is that 
on which the copy (for it is only a copy) was made, and that the original must have been 
the letter from Bradshaw of nth March 1609/10, to which reference is made in Moris's 
letter from Bantam of i4th Sept., 1610, printed in Purchas, Lib. III., c. 9, 3. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 223 

said & itf as is specified and sett downe in the Courte Booke of 
the said Company. Yf therefore the said Samuell Broadshawe 
doe from hencforth during all the said terme of yeares 

or soe long tyme thereof as the Gou r no r and Companie or their 
successo 13 shall reteyne him in their service well trulie & honestlie 
serve the said Gou r no r & Company their successo rs and Assignes 
as their servan [t] in all and eu r y their affaires and busines whatsoeu r 
w ch they or such as shall be by them authorized shall thinke good 
to ymploy him and doe his best endevo r for pformance & execucon 
of what he shall be sett aboute or ymployed in as aforesaid 
for the promtt and good service of the said Companie. And 
according to the chardg he is or shall be ymployed in doe keepe 
a true & pfect accompt of all such things as is or shalbe Comitted 
to his chardge And doe at all tymes being theare vnto required 
deliu r vp atrue Accompte of the same his ymploym* to the 
Gou r no r of the said m r chauntf or his deputie or to such as shalbe 
authorized therevnto by the said Company And doe not in this 
or any other voyadge or voyage of the said Company vse any 
private trade or tramque in m r chandize for his owne propp 
Accompt or Adventure or Colo r the private trade of any other. 
That then &c: 



|HE Condicon of this Obligacon is such That wheareas 
the aboue bound ffrancis Shapton is hired and agreed 
w^'all 1 by the aboue named Gou r no r and Companie 
of m r chaunt of London trading into the East Indies 
to goe as Preacher in this their present intended 4 th voyadge to 
those ptf . Yf therefore the said ffrancis Shapton 

The Preacher bound 

'? r> . to P erforme doe not absent himselfe but willinglie goe in 

this Condicon. 

the said voyadge & therein according to his 
best skill & knowledge doe his vttermost endevo r diligentlie to 
teach and instruct o r people by all loueing & godlie admonitions. 
And doe not during the said voyadge vse any private trade or 

1 See Court Minutes, 22nd Jan., 1607/8. Shapton was to have a salary of 33*. 6s. 8tf. 
per annum, and 2p/. for his provision to seat 




FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



traffique in m r chandizeing for his owne propp Accompt or 
Adventure, or Colo r the private trade of any other. That then 
this &c: 




|HE Condicon of this &c : That wheareas the aboue 
named H 1$. at the spetiall request and intreatie of 
the aboue bound C & l by his obligacon of the date 
aboue written standeth firmlie held and bound vnto 
S r Thomas Smyth knight & Wiftm Greenwell to thuse of the 
A condkon that the Companie of m r chaunte of London trading to the 
raue Sar hIr rSe r s Sh h a is Ea st Indies in the some and penaltie of 2OO U of 
suertie - lawfull &c : w th Condicon therevnto for the faithfull 

service of the said C S vn to the foresaid Companie and pfor- 
maunce of c r teine other Condicons and things therein mencioned 
and expressed as thereby at lardge appeth. If therefore the said 
C S ms Execu or Ads doe at all tymes heereafter and from tyme 
to tyme sufficientlie saue and keepe harmlesse & indempnified 
the said & t$ his Heires Execute 1 " 8 and Admistrato 1 " 8 of for and 
conc r ninge the said Obligacon wherein the saied 21 Ii3 standeth 
bound as is aforesaid. And of for and from all arrest? Accons 
suit? ludgm 1 ? execucons troubles chardg? and damadg? whatsoeu r 
w ch he the said & 13 his heires Execu or Ads shall thereby 
susteyne and incurr. That then this &c : 



JAMES 2 by the grace of god kinge of England Scotland 
ffraunce and Ireland defendo r of the faith, &c : To 
all to whome theis pnt? shall come Greeteing. 
Wheareas o r late deere sister Queene Elizabeth by 
her tres Patent? vnder the greate seale of England beareing 

1 Possibly Thomas Soule, who was engaged on 24th Nov., 1607, to serve for five 
years as purser's mate, or in any other employment (Court Minutes). 

2 There is a docquet of this licence in the Public Record Office, under date a8th 
Dec., 1607 (see Cal. S. P., East Indies, 1513-1616, p. 163.) The petitions leading up to 
the grant, and the letter ordering its preparation for signature, will be found on 
pages 207-217. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 225 

A Lycence for date at Westminster the one & thirteth dale of 

transportacon of 

moneys vncoyned Decemb in the three and forteth yeare of her 
reigne vpon peticon made vnto her by diu r s her 
loueing subiectf for her royall Assent and lycense to be granted 
vnto them. That they at their owne Adventure Costf and 
chardges aswell for the hono r of this Realme of England as 
for the increase of Nauigacon and Advancem* of trade of 
nY'chandize w th in the same might Adventure and sett forth 
c r teine voyage w th a Convenient nomber of shipps & Pynnaces 
by way of traffique & m r chandize into the East Indies in the 
Countries and Portf of Asia & Affrica did incorporate the said 
petitions into a Bodie politique by the name of the Gou r no r 
and Companie of nVchauntf of London trading into the East 
Indies. To haue hould and inioy the sole benefitt of the trade 
& traffique of the said East Indies for the space of fyfteene 
yeares from the birth of o r lord god then last past before the 
date of the said tres Patent^ . And wheareas by the said tres 
Patent^ lycence was granted to the said Gou r no r and Company 
of m r chauntf of London trading into the East Indies to trans- 
porte out of this Realme into the said Indies in eu r y of their 
voyadgf during the said terme of ffyfteene yeares All such 
forreine Coyne of Silver, Spanish or other forreine sylver, or 
bullion of sylver as they should during the said terme bring or 
cause to be brought into this Realme of England from the 
partC beyond the Seas, either in the same kinde, stampe, sorte 
or fashion w ch it should haue when they brought it in or any 
other forme stampe or fashion Coyned in the mynte w th in the 
Tower of London soe as the whole quantities of Coyne or 
moneys by them to be transported in any of their said voyadgf 
during the said terme should not exceed the value of Thirtie 
Thowsand poundf in any one voyadge and soe as the some of 
eight 1 Thowsand poundf at the least .pcell of the said some or value 
3oooo u to be transported as aforesaid should be first coyned w th in 
the said Tower of London before the tyme 2 might be transported 
in any of the said voyadgf as by the said tres Patentf more at 
lardge appeth. Now forasmuch as the said Gou r no r and Companie 
of the said nVchauntf since the said tres Patentf to them granted 

1 This should be " six " (see page 180). 2 A mistake for " same " ? 



22 6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

made twoe seu r all voyadg? into the said East Indies and 
retourned their shipps from thence laden w th sundrie kind? of 
m r chandizes proffitable for o r kingdomes, and haue alreadie sett 
forth the last yeare a third voyage & are now in a redines to sett 
forth a fourth voyadge into the said East Indies, and haue humblie 
besought by Peticon & shewed vnto vs that by experience they 
haue form r lie found that they could not w th out greate difficultie 
and losse vnto them in the value of their moneys new coyned 
make trade for their m r chandize into the said East Indies because 
they were not such as the People of those pt? were acquainted 
w th all, but stamped w th an Imadge or supscripcon strange and 
vnknowne vnto them And that they haue beene and are desierous 
by all good meanes to manadge and carie their said trade as neere 
as they can for the benefitt of o r kingdomes & domynions, rather by 
the transportacon of the natiue Comodities of the same, & by bartr- 
ing & exchandge of them for forraine Comodities, w ch now they 
purpose more lardglie to attempt & haue good hope to accomplish 
then by vsing the whole lifctie granted to them by the said tres 
Patent? for carying out of the full some of Thirtie thowsand 
pound? in eu r y voyadge in mann r aforesaid, And that they will 
content themselues in this their now intended fourth voyadge to 
the said Indies w th the libtie of Transporting Twentie thowsand 
pound? onelie in forreine Coines or forreine sylver w th out other 
Coyne bullion or Silver. In reguard wheareof they did humblie 
pray in their said peticon that we would be gratiouslie pleased to 
graunte them lycence that they may transporte the value of 
Twentie Thowsand pound? in forreine Coynes or forreine sylver in 
this their intended fourth voyadge, w th out new coyneing the same, 
or any pte thereof Knowe yee therefore that we favoring the said 
m r chaunt?, and being desierous to giue them furtherance and 
incourradgem 4 to proceede and goe forward in their trade, of o 1 ' 
espetiall grace c r teine knowledge & meere motion haue geven and 
granted and by theis present? for vs o r heires and Successo rs doe 
giue and graunte lycence vnto the said Gou r no r and Companie of 
m r chaunt? of London trading into the East Indies that it shall 
and may be lawfull for them their facto ra and Assignes in this now 
intended fourth voyadge into the East Indies, to transporte out 
of this o r Realme of England all such forreine Coyne or silver, 
either Spanish or other forreine silver as they haue prepared 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 227 

procured or gotten or shall p r pare procure or gett being alreadie 
brought or to be brought from the partf beyond the seas, before 
the depture of their shipps out of the River of Thames soe as the 
whole quantitie of the Coyne moneys & silver by them soe to be 
transported in this their present intended fourth voyadge towardf 
the said East Indies doe not exceede the value of Twentie 
thowsand poundf the same to be transported in the same kinde, 
sorte, stampe, or fashion as they said moneys or silver are or 
shall be procured gotten or brought into this Realme of England, 
& that w th out any new coyneing or altering the said forreine 
monies or silver, or any pte thereof Any statute restrainte or 
prohibition in that behalfe made to the Contrary in any wise 
notw th standing. In witnes whereof we haue caused theis o r ires 
to be made Patentf Witnes o 1 ' selfe at westin the eight day of 
ffebruarie in the fifte yeare of o r Reigne of England ffraunce and 
Ireland & of Scotland the one and forteth. 

p fere de private sigillo Coppin. 




[AMES 1 by the grace of God kinge of England Scotland 
ffraunce and Ireland defendo 1 ' of the faith &c: To o r 
trustie and welbeloued Alexander Sharpie and Richard 
Rowles Greeting Whereas diu r s of o r loueing subiect^ at 
their owne Adventures costf and chardgf aswell for the hono 1 ' of 
A spetiaii comission t*" s * R ea -l me of England as for the increase and 
dCT Cd shap ( le Gen-" advancem* of trade of m r chandize w th in the same 
Rowies & Ldutenan d t ^ aue form'lie sett forth three voyadg^ to the East 



7. Indies w th c r teine shipps & Pinnacf by way of 

nV'chandizeing by w ch shipps and Pinnae^ they haueing discou r ed 

1 A Commission to the commanders of the Fourth Voyage, the most disastrous of 
all the early ventures of the Company. The expedition consisted of two vessels, viz. 
the Assertion, which had been previously employed in the First and Second Voyages, 
and the Union, which was specially bought for the occasion. Alexander Sharpie, the 
General of the expedition, was in command of the Assertion, and Richard Rowles 
took charge of the Union. The two ships got separated after leaving Saldanha Bay. 
The Assertion, after some delay on the African coast, and visits to Aden (where 

9 i 



2 a8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

and begunn to settle a trade in some pte of the said East Indies 
& their shipps being retourned in twoe of their form r voyadgf 
from thence laden w th sundrie m r chandize brought from those pt , 
they the said m r chauntf intending to frequent those Countries of 
the East Indies by Contynuing the trade alreadie discou r ed and 
begonn and indevoring further discou r y of trade of those ptf for 
the more ample vent of the natiue Comodities of o r kingdomes, 
and retourning from the places of their discou r y such necessarie 
Commodities as shalbe of spetiall vse and benefitt both to vs and 
o r subiectf, and haue now prepared c r teine shipps to the said 
East Indies. And whereas the said m r chauntc haue Chosen you 
the said Alexander Sharpey to be principall Gou r no r or Gen r all of 
all the m r chaunte Mariners and other o r subiectf w ch are or shalbe 
shipped in any of the said shipps. And you the said Richard 
Rowles to be Leiutenant gen r all of all the m r chauntf Marin r s & 
other o r subietc w ch are or shall be shipped in any of the said 
shipps, Wee gratiouslie favoring their intended voyadge and 
approueing and allowing of their choise of you [to] the same 
Gou'nm 1 being desierous to furnish you w th all fitt and Convenient 
power and authoritie to rule and gou r ne all & eu r y o r subiectf 
ymployed in this voyadge by a due obedience to be by them 
yealded vnto you in the obserueing & executeing of all such 

Sharpie was for some time kept prisoner by the governor) and Mocha, shaped her 
course for Surat. On the agth August, she ran on a shoal in the bay of Cambay, 
and three days later became a total wreck. The crew made their way in their boats 
into the Gandevi River, some thirty miles south of Surat. Here they were hospitably 
treated by the natives and passed on to Surat, whence Sharpie and a large number 
of the men started for Agra. Sharpie and others were left sick on the route ; others 
died or straggled from the company ; and finally only three men reached their 
destination, and reported the state of affairs to Captain Hawkins, who was then in 
the city as the representative of the Company. In Oct., 1611, Sharpie embarked on 
the Trades Increase at Surat, and accompanied Sir Henry Middleton, who seems to 
have entertained a high opinion of him, to Mocha and Bantam. Captain Downton, 
writing in June, 1613, mentions Sharpie as being then absent from Bantam, and this 
is the last notice of him that can be traced. 

The Union, as has already been mentioned on page 222, note, after losing her 
commander and several of her men at Madagascar, proceeded to Acheen and procured 
a cargo, but on her way home, was wrecked off Audierne, on the coast of Brittany, 
with the loss of nearly all her crew. 

There is a docquet of this commission in the Public Record Office (see Cal. Dom. 
State Papers, 1603-1610, p. 400). 



THE EAST ItfDIA COMPANY. 22$ 

good orders and Constitucons as you shall thinke Convenient to 
ordaine and appointe for the furtherance of the said voyadge to 
the hono r of vs and o r kingdomes, and for the advancem* of The 
said trade doe hereby straightlie chardge and Comand all and 
eu r y pson and psonns ymployed vsed or shipped in this voyadge in 
any of the said shipps to giue all due obedience and respect vnto 
you during the said voyadge, and to beare themselues one towardf 
another in all good order and quietnes for avoieding any occasion 
that might breed mutiny quarrells or dissencon amongest them to 
the hindrance of the good successe w ch is to be hoped for by Godf 
providence of the said intended voyadge, and in defaulte of such 
dutie & obedience to be pformed towardf yo u for the Correccon 
and quenching of all such mutiny quarrells or dissencon that shall 
or may be moued by the disorder evill disposition or pversnes of 
any the said psonns. Wee doe hereby authorize you the said 
Alexander Sharpie during the said voyadge or during soe long 
tyme as you shall lyve in the said voyadge to chastice correct and 
ponish all Offendo rs and transgresso rs in that behalfe according to 
the qualitie of their Offences w th such ponishm^ as are comonlie 
vsed in all Armies by Sea when they are not Capitall, And for 
Capitall Offences as for wilfull murther w cl1 is hatefull in the sight 
of god, or muteny w ch is an offence that may tend to the ou r throwe 
of the said voyadge the same being trulie and iustlie proved 
against any of the pson or psonns aforesaid. We doe hereby giue 
vnto you the said Alexander Sharpie during all the tyme of the 
said voyadge or during soe long tyme as you shall Hue in the 
same full power and authoritie to vse and put in execucon o r lawe 
called Marshall lawe in that behalfe. And in case of yo r decease 
w ch god forbid we doe then likewise hereby authorize you the said 
Richard Rowles to execute the power and authoritie by this o r 
Comission granted to the said Alexander Sharpey in as ample 
mann r as is herein before expressed, and in such sorte as the said 
Alexander Sharpey did or might doe by vertue hereof, and theis o r 
ires shalbe vnto you and either of you sufficient warrant and 
dischardge for the doing and executeing of all and singuler the 
premisses. And forasmuch as at this present tyme we are in 
amitie w th all Christian Princes and are vnwilling that any o r 
subiect^ should giue occasion of breache or hindrance of that league 



i 3 d FIRST LETTER llOOK 01* 

or amitie w ch we hould w th any o r Confederate freindf or Allies. 
And because we are not ignorant of the emulacon and en vie that doth 
accompanie the discou r y of Countries and tradf and of the quarrells 
and Contencons w dl doe manytymes fall out betweene the subiectf 
of diu r s Princes that meete the one w th the other in forreine and farr 
remote Countries in the Course & psecuteing of their discou r ies, 
and being desierous that o r subiectf should forbeare to moue or 
beginn any quarrell or Contencon vpon the subiectf of o r 
Confederate freindf or Allies either in their pceeding or retourne 
vpon or from any of their voyadgf . We therefore doe hereby 
straightlie chardge and Comand you the said Alexander Sharpie, 
and you the said Richard Rowles and all other vnder yo r go^nm 1 
that neither in yo r voyadge outward or homeward f or in any 
Countrie Hand Porte or place where you shall abide or come 
during the time of yo r being abroad out of o r kingdomes or 
dominions where you meete w t]l any the subiectf of the kinge of 
Spaine or of any other o r Confederate freindf or allies, or of any 
other nacon or people, their shipps vessells goodf or m r chandize 
you doe attempt or goe aboute to sett vpon take or surprize their 
psons shipps Vessells goodf or m r chandizes or offer any iniurie or 
discourtesie vnto them vnlesse you shall be by them first there- 
vnto iustlie prouoked or driven either in the iust defence of yo r 
owne psonns yo r ships vessells goodf or m r chandize either by any 
other their disturbance or hindrance whatsoeu r in yo r quiett 
course of trade either for recompence or recou r y of the psonns 
goode or m r chandize of any o r subiectc that are alreadie in or 
neare the East Indies or otherwise for any iust cause of yo r 
defence as you will awnsweare the Contrarie at yo r vttermost 
pills. In Witnes whereof we haue caused theis o r Ires to be 
made Patentf Witnes o r selfe at Westm the eight day of 
ffebruarie in the fifte yeare of o r Reigne of England ffraunce & 
Ireland & of Scotland the xxxxj thl 

Coppin. 
p fcre de priuato sigillo 



1607/8. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 231 

What ires were written from his ma tie to the Princes 
in the East Indies in ffebruarie 1607. l 

[HAT was the form r 7 tres folio. 4i. 2 Viz to Suratt Aden 
Tedore Nere Lunter lava Maior, Molloccos, & the Ire 
of the Teno r of that to Surate purposed for Callicutt, 
written from his ma tie : to those Princes Anno 1606. 
were now all againe of new written from his ma tie : to those 
Princes in Anno 1607 w th this Addicon to each 

In all is Ires were .. _, * i i t -i 

now sent onelie That is. Although we sent vnto you the 

forf.3 aig last yeare after the retourne of o r Subiectf from 

those ptf & sent you a Present yet for that we doubt whether 
those tres be come to yo r handf , we haue thought good to Visitt 
you againe w th new tres & w th a new present, And to lett you 
vnderstand that the Content^ of o r former tres were to this 
purpose That &c : as in the m r gent of the foresaid tre to the 
Molloccos. 4 

Lykewise ffower tres more were now written from his ma tie : to 
the Princes & Gou r no rs in those parts Viz 2 of the Teno r of that 
of Suratt w th generall salutacons in the inside & on the outside 
left Blancke for o r ffacto rs to sett downe the names and titles of 
such Princes there as they shall see good to deliu r them vnto, w th 
Present^ alsoe in their discrecons. Thother 2 tres from his ma tie : 
to Gou r no rs of Citties, Viz the one of w ch of the Teno r of that to 
Aden w th out the said new Addicon before mencioned intended to 
the Sabander or Gou r no r of Moccha & thother alsoe of the same 
Teno r of that to Aden onelie leaueing out the said new addicon 
now sent, & the wordf of his ma ties Amitie w th the Grandsenio r 
mencioned in the said first tre to Aden the w ch is intended for 
Lawrie 5 Nigertattie 6 or any such place & therefore the supscripcon 
left vnsett downe, vntill the same be knowen vnto whome they 
shall be thought fitt to be deliu r ed vnto in those partf. 

1 At a Court held on the i5th December, 1607, the governor and others "were 
" intreated to Consider what Comissions and Ires aswell from his ma tie : as from the 
" Companie wilbe now convenient to be sent, And therevpon to cause the same, to be 
" drawne and made readie in due tyme before the departure of the shipps " (Court 
Minutes). 

~ i.e. page 103. 

3 The last four words have been added by another hand. 

4 See page 109. 5 See page 251, note 2. 6 See page 252, note i. 




FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

ffor better Remembrancf to direct the titles of the 
before mencioned 5 blanckf 3 whereof to Princes & 2 to 
Citties they are nombred as followeth Viz. 

|O i is the Coppie of the first blanck sent in the yeare 
1606 w th the new Addicon now onelie to be deliu r ed to 
Callicutt or to such Prince as you shall vnderstand, 
the same was then form r lie deliu r ed 
No 2 & 3 is 2 blanckf of the Teno r of that to Suratt to any Prince 
vnto whome form r lie noe ires hath beene sent & there- 
fore w th out the said Addicon 

No 4 is the Gou r no r of a Cittie of the teno r of that to Aden w th out 
any Addicon for that noe ires hath beene heretofore 
sent thither, the w ch is intended for Moccha some 10 
miles from Aden vnder the Comand of the Grandsenio 1 . 
No 5 The 5 & last Blancke alsoe to the Gou r no r of some Cittie 
of the same teno r of that to Aden w th out any Addicon 
for the reason aforesaid in no : 4 & w th out any nomi- 
nacon of o r kingf ma ties : Amitie w th the grandsenio r for 
that the same is intended for some Cittie out of his 
Dominions. 



I AMES by the grace of God of greate Brittaine ffraunce 
and Ireland Kinge Defendo r of the faith &c : To all 
and eu r y one Kingf, Princes, Dukf , Marquesses Statf 
Admirallf Captaines Castellers Gou r no rs and Superio" 
of Provinces Citties Townes Seas Rivers of 1 Bridge &c : & to all 
other of what order or place soeu r haueing 

Lresof safeCondut* . . 

for iohn inurdan & Comaund power Magistracie or lunsdiccon 

Phillip Glascockc 

&c: goeing to the health. Such as take vpon them greate matters 

East Indies . i6of 

aboue the vulgar vse and Custome verie promt- 
able to humane Societie deserue not onelie prayse and favo r of 

1 Apparently an error for " and." 

3 In the Company's general instructions for the voyage (set page 245), orders were 
given for the despatch overland of messengers, for whose safety a royal safe conduct 
(no doubt the present document) had been procured ; and in later letters the Company 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. $33 

all men, but alsoe aide and helpe asmuch as may be lawfullie 
& convenientlie yealded. In the w dl kinde scarce any can be 
[ P profitable & worthy then of them, the w ch by long 

Peregrinacons greate [ ] danger of life, veiweing most 

remote & vnknowne Nacons & kingdomes [ ] Sea doe 

seeke eu r y wheare all oportunities of Comodities, & doe 
[ ]allie a kinde of Societie and Comunicacon of Como- 

dities among all [ ] elude doe Contract the vniu r sitie of 

Mankinde & the whole world [ ]e Cittie & Communion. 

And forasmuch as c r teine o r subiectf [ ] this selfe same 

minde & intencon take vpon them a lourney [ ] that 

w th out the iniury or trouble of any man they may [ ]d 

Comodious meanes to o r subiectf of Interchandge of [ ] 

people & of m r chandizeing thingf it be most iust and [ ] 

anitie that vnto the selfe same m r chaunt & vnto their ffacto 
[ ] and comeing by Sea and land be granted vnto them 

of all [ ]de, Yet that they may mor safelie and redilie 

proceede in their [ Jhey may haue the inclinacons of 

all men of what order & place [ ] the shall come more 

redy to graunte them that libertie, & to be fauorable [ ] 

expressed their strong disapproval that their orders on this point had not been carried 
out. It would appear that Jourdain and Glascock were the two factors designated 
for this duty. 

John Jourdain or Jourdan was elected a factor on yth Dec., 1607, and was assigned 
to the Assertion. On the wreck of the vessel he appears to have made his way to 
Agra, and thence back to Surat, where in Oct., 1611, he embarked on Sir Henry 
Middleton's ship, and accompanied him in his voyage to the Red Sea and afterwards 
to Bantam. He seems to have been actively employed during the next few years in 
trading voyages from Bantam to various parts of the East Indies, and in 1614 we 
find him "president of the English at Bantam." He returned to England in 1617, 
but in the same year entered into an agreement with the Company to serve them for 
a fresh term of five years; and accordingly by Nov., 1618, he was back again in his old 
post as President at Bantam. Eight months later he was slain in a skirmish with 
the Dutch at Patani. His journal, covering the period between his departure from 
England in March, 1608, and his return in 1617, is now in the British Museum 
(Sloane MSS., 858). 

Philip Glascock was elected a factor at the same time as Jourdain, but a few days 
later was rejected in favour of Richard Wickham. On 22nd Jan., 1607/8, he was 
again elected, and proceeded on the voyage. Nothing of importance can be traced 
concerning his further career. 

1 The manuscript is here imperfect. A large portion of the leaf has been torn 
away, causing considerable gaps both in this and the succeeding letter. These lacuna 
have been indicated by the insertion of brackets. 



234 FtbST LETTER BOOK OP 

w ch by the lawe of humanitie as is said before ought to be 
granted of [ ] wish the same to be obtaiened by o r 

Intercession & for that cause wee [ ]nient to giue theis o r 

ires of safe Conduct & Comendacon to c r teine [ ] hauntf 

of o rs and namelie to John lourdan and Phillipp Glascocke 
by [ ]ie much intreate all & singuler Kingf Princes 

Dukf Marquesses Admiralls and superio rs of Provinces Townes 
Castles & Portf & all others of what degree and place soeu r 
haueing magistracy lurisdiccon or power as may be agreeable 
to the order and dignitie of eu r y one, that you will geue leaue 
to the foresaid o r subiectf & either of them, or to any other 
that shall bring theis o r Ires vnto you by Land or sea to goe or to 
saile to goe forward or retourne & as their occasion shall requier 
to remaine in their dominions & that they will not geue or suffer 
any lett hindrance Iniurie or molestacon to be done vnto them, 
but that they will yeald vnto them such Offices of benevolence 
and humanitie as shall be convenient to be yealded to honest 
men and strangers vndertakeing soe longe and laborious a 
lourney : handling their owne affaires & behaueing themselues 
honestlie & peaceablie. In the w ch kinde of Office or any other 
that may mutuallie be expected of vs we will be most redie to 
retourne the like favo r vnto all & singuler yf occasion shall 
serue as shall be due to eu r y one according to their order place 
& dignitie Giuen out of o r Pallace of Westin this xxiii th of 
ffebruarie 1607. 

JAMES REX. 




my hartie Comendacons &c : According to order 
of a Courte of the Adventurers in this present 4 th 
voyadge held the fift of this instant Theis are to 
advertice you that the Companie are pleased and soe 
doe thinke it fitt that you w th yo r Leiuetenante Generall m r 
The coppie of a ire Rowles, & such as may happen to succeede you 

sent torn' Alexander ... . ,, f 

sharpie Genraii.i m this voyadge doe make espetiall accompt of 

1 The date is torn away, but it should evidently be some day in March, 1607/8, 
as appears from the following entries : 

Further mr Gou r no r was now by this Courte intreated to write his Ire to m r 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 235 

*& of the order of Joseph Salbancke 2 aswell in all yo r Councells as 

Courte not to deale r < " 

in any other manner otherwise. & the rather for that they doe esteeme 

but by way of mar- ' > 

March ^7 " f kirn to ^ e a man verie sufficient for any place 

wherein you shall vse him. And further the 

Companie thinke it meete that you doe carefullie reserue [and] 3 

keepe this tre amongst other yo r Comissions, that yo u and such as 

" Sharpie Gen r all signifieing vnto him that the Companie are pleased, and thinke yt 
"fitt, that he w th the Leiuetenante Gen r all and such as shall succeede them doe 
" make espetiall vse of Joseph Salbancke in their Councell, & otherwyse vnlesse they 
" shall finde some iuste reason to the Contrarie. And further willinge him to keepe 
" and reserue this his Ire amongst other his Comissions that he and such as shall 
" succeede him may take notice thereof, as there shall be occasion." (Court Minutes, 
5th March, 1607/8.) 

" Att this Courte his ma ties Ires and Comissions w th his ma ties saffe Conduct, & 
" their Coppies in English were now deliu r ed to m r Sharpie, w th expresse Admonicon 
" that they doe their best endevo 1 " 8 for the performeing of this voyadge by way of honest 
" m r chandize, to w ch end & purpose onelie we haue sett them forth & furnished them 
" w th all thinges needfull & necessarie to that effect, w th expresse order alsoe that they 
" doe abstaine from dealeing w th any person in bereaueing manner, nor in any other 
"then in freindlie sorte : vnlesse onelie w th such who shall seeke to provoke them 
" therevnto, by any hindrance to their quiett trade: by taking of any o r goodes &c: 
" According to the Teno r of his ma tes Comission now by vs procured for them. Aswell 
" for the avoiedinge of all scandall to the Company as for performance of his ma tes : 
" said Comission, as they will awnsweare the Contrarie." (Ibid., nth March, 1607/8.) 

1 Added by another hand. 

" Joseph Salbancke was possibly the original member of the Company of that 
name, who adventured 240^. in the First Voyage ; and hence, it may be, the considera- 
tion with which he was now treated. After the wreck of the Assertion he proceeded 
to Agra, and thence started with Covert through Persia and Arabia to make his way 
overland to England. At Bagdad, however, they met an Englishman named White, 
who informed them of Middleton's expedition ; whereupon Salbancke determined to 
make for the Red Sea, hoping to meet Middleton, and acquaint him with the parti- 
culars of Sharpie's voyage and shipwreck. On his journey he heard a false story of 
Middleton's capture, whereupon he tried to make his way to Socotra, but fell into 
the hands of the Portuguese, who carried him to Muscat, thence to Ormuz and Goa, 
and finally, it would seem, to Lisbon, where he was released and returned to England. 
In 1612 he went out again as cape merchant in the Expedition of the Twelfth Voyage. 
He was at home once more in 1614, but seems to have left again for the Indies in 
the following spring with Keeling on a voyage on account of the First Joint Stock. 
In [Nov. ?] 1616 he writes from Agra, where he seems to have remained for some 
time. In 1618 he took part in a voyage from Surat to the Red Sea, when a firman 
was obtained from the Pasha of Sana for trade at Mocha, &c. Nothing can be traced 
as to the time or place of his death, but it must have been before the end of 1624, as 
by Jan., 1625, his widow had married again. 

3 There are gaps here and in the next few lines, owing to a portion of the leaf 
having been torn away (see note, page 233). 




236 FlltST LETTSlt BOOK OP 

may [happen] to succeede yo u as aforesaid may take notice 
thereof from tyme to [tyme as there] shall be occasion. Wherew th 
I Comitt yo u all to the Tuition of [Almightie God who] send yo u a 
prosperous successe in all yo r affaires. London th[ ] 

[Thomas Smyth] 



To o r loueing freind m r Wiftm Kealinge Gen r all 
in o r third voyadge to the East Indies, & in his absence 
to such other of o r ffacto as shall be Resident at 
Bantam or ells where in the said East Indies. 1 

[FTER o r hartie Comendacons &c : Since yo r depture 
from o r Coaste in Aprill last we haue not heard from 
you the w ch we conceiue to happen by noe default in 
you, but onelie for that you haue not had any meanes 
to write vnto vs, & we doubt not but ere this you are all in saffetie 
A CD ie of this ire arr i ue d to some of o r dcsicred Portf in the Indies 
hi's 6 accordinge to yo r Comission where we hope that 
t'is on'Sdr ky y T 8^ Industrie and carriadge we shall finde 
thSSn. to be done sufficient & proffitable trade, & likewise haue 
those retournes w ch you shall make home in such 

Twoe copies sent one . . , 

to m r Keaiing & an Comodities as for their qualitie and goodnes will 

other to mr Hawkins _ 

wth this Super- be more beneficiall vnto vs, then hitherto we haue 
had as before yo r depture hence, & by by yo r 

3 " Att this Courte was red a Ire from the Adventurers in the 3 th to their ffacto 115 
" at Bantam, or els where in the Indies, and allowed to be sent as it was now agreed 
" vpon. And further yt was ordered That amongst other thinges therein mencioned 
" yt be incerted into the said Ire. That yf the Adventurers in the 4 th voyadge shall 
" happen to leaue any ffacto 1 " 5 in the Indifes] where the ffacto rs of the 3 voyadge shall 
" be Resident, That the ffacto re in both th[e] voyadges doe remaine and Hue together 
" At the chardge equallie pro rato according to the quantitie of goodes w ch shall be 
" theare left for each accompt. And further yt was agreed. That yf the shipps of 
" the Adventurers in the said 4 th voyadge shall happen to bringe home any of the 
" goodes of the Adventurers in the 3 voyage, they are to pay freight for the same 
" after the rate of [figures deleted] }i per Tunn &c: As by the same Ire Coppied into 
" the Register at lardge Appereth. A Coppie of wh Ire was now alsoe deliu r ed to m r 
" Sharpie Gen r all for better vnderstandinge what therein was to be performed on his 
" parte &c." (Court Minutes, izth March, 1607/8.) 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 237 

instruccons you haue beene sufficientlie informed, & therefore 
we make noe question but you will doe yo r vtmost endevo r3 
therein as we put o r trust in you. 

And resolving the Continuance of o r trade in those pt as we 
haue at yo r being heare ympted vnto you, we haue now prepared 
twoe shipps (viz) the Assencon & the Vnion of w ch shipps and 
men by Comission from o 1 ' king? ma tie : m r Alexander Sharpie is o r 
Generall in the Assencon & m r Richard Rowles his Leiuetenante 
Gen r all in the Vnion by whome we haue now sent theis o r tres 
vnto you, and thoughe wee cannot but giue you to vnderstand 
that this voyadge is solie one ioincte stocke seu r all from any of 
the former voyadgf , yett the same is sett forth by some alsoe 
interessed in the third voyadge, whoe are authorized & allowed 
by the gen r all Companie to doe the same And are inclined & 
authorized the next yeare to doe the like. Wherefore as the 
forenamed Generall and others now sent haue order for their pt? 
to doe the best Assistaunce they cann, soe we wish you to shew 
them all kindnes and favo r you may, aswell in the direccon of 
their trade & saffetie as otherwise, yett soe as the Accomptf be 
noe way mingled, nor the proceeding? of either, be any way 
preiudiceall thone to thother & they Comeing to any place 
wherein you shall be Resident as loueing Brothers and servant? 
of one Companie you are to instruct them by the best meanes you 
may howe you haue there proceeded w th the Superio" of the 
place, & what you haue done conc r ninge the setlinge of yo r 
trade, & howe the same is likelie to stand. And alsoe of what 
els shall be fitt for the Comon good, that you w th them & they 
w th you may soe agree in Concorde that all thing? may be soe 
done as both you and we may haue comforte of yo r proceeding? 
therein. 

And forasmuch as that o r men the w ch you shall leaue in 
those pt? may haue some occasion of longer staie theare before 
retourne of o r shipps from hence thither vnto them againe, then 
we at yo r being heare intended : we wish you to giue them 
expresse chardge soe to carie them selues that they may be 
esteemed good husband? for the Companie, rather increasers 
then diminishers of what stocke you shall leaue w th them. And 
jt is expected that by their good Industrie in buieing of Cashes 



2 3 8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

& other ymploimente they may easilie beare their chardges 
theare, w th oiTplus to the proffitt of the Companie w ch as is 
reported they bring to their owne priuate the w ch we cannot 
endure And well pvsing ou r o r tres by you sent vnto them doe vse 
their best endevo rs to applie them selues diligentlie to pforme o r 
direccons therein mencioned, & what els, by experience they may 
learne, that when o r shipps shall come thither both we & the 
may finde them to haue beene both diligent industrious & good 
and faithfull Steward^ to the Companie, & for better pformance 
of o r said direccons, we haue now sent them a Coppie of o r 
foresaid tres by you m r Kealinge sent the last yeare. And further 
theis are to requier you that if the shipps of the Adventurers 
in the 4 th voyadge shall happen to come where you shall be 
resident & wante ladeing of their owne. That then & in such 
case you haueing any goodf to send home you doe lade soe much 
of the best thereof as convenientlie they shall be able to take in, 
being it much better that the same be soe brought home then 
that it should lie theare dead : wherein you are to haue due 
care that the Accomptf of either pte be noe way mingled & that 
yo r goodf sent doe come vnder a seu r all Marke, Consigned by 
Bills of ladinge to the vse of the Gou r no r and Companie of the 
Adventurers in the third voyadge, takeing the best order that 
you can for keepinge of the seu r all goodf of both voyadgf apte 
thone from thother & that tres be writte what shall be remaine- 
inge for each Accompt. And further you shall vnderstand That 
if by theis meanes you shall send home any of o r goodf by the 
said shipps of the Adventurers in the 4 th voyadge & for the same 
or for some other cause there shall be noe need or ymployment 
for soe many of o r ffacto rs there w ch may happen to be left. Then 
we doe order that some of the most insufficientest of o r ffacto rs 
there be brought home by the said shipps in the 4 th voyadge 
if in the discrecon of the now Generall m r Sharpie & the cheeffest 
of o r ffacto rs there it shall be soe thought fitt. And alsoe if the 
Adventurers in the said 4 th voyadge shall leaue any ffacto rs in the 
Indies where you shall be resident, That the ffacto 1 ' 8 in both the 
voyadgf doe remaine and Hue together At the chardge equallie 
p rato accordinge to the quantitie of the goodf w ch shall be there 
left for each accompt And thus not doubting of yo r faithful! care 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 239 

and diligence in the premisses we pray God to blesse you all 
London the 12 th day of March 1607. 

Yo r loueing ffreindf the Gou r no r Comitties & 
Generalitie of the Companie of rn r chantc 
trading into the East Indies. 



jO ALL 1 to whome this present writing shall come to 
be seene herd or red wee the gouerno 1 ' and Companie 
of Marchauntf of London trading into the Easte 
Indians send greeting in our Lord god everlasting 
Whereas wee the said Gouerno 1 ' and Companie of Marchauntf 
THIS > is the draught haue Entertayned Phillip de Grauae 3 of the pre- 
ture^ph^ A Gra e eff cinct of s * Katherins neare the Tower of London 
Marrioner to goe as principall m r for o r vses in 
this pnte voyadge nowe by vs prepared towardes the saide Easte 
Indians Knowe yee therefore that wee the saide Gouernor and 
Companie of Marchauntf for the further allowance and recom- 
pence of the good service trauell and paines w ch hee the said 
Phillip de Grauae intendeth to .pforme in the said voyage doe 
by these pntf for o* selues and everie of vs and the Executors 
and admstrators of vs and everie of vs Covenante promise and 
graunte to and w th the said Phillip de Grause his executors 
admstrators and assignes, To give pay and allowe vnto him the 
saide Phillip de Grauae his executors admstrators or assignes 
oute of o r proper stockes aduentured in the said voyadge w th in six 
Monethes next after that the said shippes w ch is now bounde of 
the saide voyadge to the East Indians or any of them shall 
returne into the River of Thames neighe the port of London and 



1 This is entered on a separate sheet of paper, which has been fastened into the 
book at this place. It is endorsed " The draught of the bill of Aduenture left by m r 
" Graeffe," and appears to represent " m r Graeffe's " idea of how his bill of adventure 
should be worded. The document actually adopted will be found at page 269. 

2 Marginal note added by another hand. 

8 Philip Grove, de Graeffe or Grave, a Fleming by birth, was second pilot in the 
First Voyage, master of the Dragon in the Second, and master of the Assertion in the 
Fourth, It is not known what became of him after the shipwreck of the latter vessel, 



2 4 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



all the goodf laide on land in London The benifitt proffitt and 
gaine that shall growe of ffive hundred and ffiftie poundes sterling 
(according to the rate of such an adventure in the said voyadge) 
oute of the gaine w ch god shall send by the returne of the said 
voyage, (The Charges of the voyadge & of the goodf returned 
therevppon groweing dew to be paied being ffirste deducted) In 
wittnes whereof wee haue herevnto Caused o r Common Scale to 
be put and deliuered this as o r deedf yeeven the day of 

1607 

Annoq RR is : lacobi Anglie &c a quinto Et Scotie 
quadragesimo primo. 



IN the name of God Amen the last of Februarie 1607. 

A Comission 1 set downe by vs the Gou r no r Deputie 
and Comitties of the m r chaunt of London trading to 
the East Indies for better direccon of o r loueing freindf 
the Generall Leuietenante & other the Captaines 
nVchantf Masters & Mariners in this o r intended fourth 
voyadge to those ptf w ch we humblie beseech god to 
blesse w th a happie Conclusion. 

|N PRIM IS whereas we the m r chaunt aforesaid haue 
prepared w th o r greate chardge & trouble Twoe 
Shipps (viz) the Assencon of 350 Tonns Phillipp de 
Graeffe m r , And the Vnion of 400 Tonns Griffin 
Morris 2 m r , for a voyadge by Godf grace by them to be made to 
the East Indies, & haue furnished them suffi- 
iir'shSpFe'lwSitJd cientlie, & in plentifull manner w th men Tackle 
Genra11 victualls & all other needfull prouisions fitt for 

such a voyadge : of a spetiall trust and Confidence w ch we haue 
in the integritie & iust carrieinge of o r loueinge freind Alexander 

1 "Att this Courte were red and allowed the Comissions from the Company to 
" the said Alexander Sharpie & Richard Rowles dated the last day of ffebruarie, and 
" the Blanckes in the same Comissions for the ffacto 1 " 8 names vnfilled, but left to the 
" Gen r alls discrecons." (Court Minutes, 5th March, 1607/8.) 

" Pied at Pria.man about the end of 1600,. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 241 

Sharpie we doe appointe and authorize him Gen r all to goe in the 
Assencon and to Comand o r said shipps & all the men in them 
haueing procured him sufficient authoritie from o r souereigne 
Lord the kingc ma tie : for that purpose not doubtinge but that he 
will soe behaue himselfe as he may be both feared and loued & 
that he will w th all his diligence and endevo r prosecute o r designes 
and labo r to bringe this o r intended voyadge to a happie end. 

Item we appointe and ordeine o r loueing freind Richard 
The Leiuetenante Rowles to be Leiuctenante of o r said shipps & 

General!^ men an( J to ta ^ e ^ p assa( }g e j n the Vnion, W ch 

Comanders ffacto rs m rs : & Mariners we trust will 
soe carrie them selues w th such due respect one to an other, and 
obedience to eu r y one of their Superio TS as loue & kindnes be 
contynued on all sidf , & all whollie applie their wittf & endevo" 
for the due pformance of this voyadge, in the best manner they 
may for the good of the Companie. 

Item and for that religious gou^m* & exercise doth best 
ffor religious goummt binde men to pforme their duties it is principallie 
& prayers^daiiie to b e care d f or that prayers be said morninge and 
eveninge in each shipp and the whole Companie 
called therevnto, w th diligent Eyes that none be wantinge that all 
ioinctlie may w th reuerence and humilitie pray vnto Almightie god 
to blesse and preserue them from all danger in this longe and 
tedious voyadge. 

Item that noe blasphemeing of god, swearing thefte dronken- 
Against blaspheme- nes or otherlike disorders be vsed but that the 
ga g mes & vn ' awfu11 same be scvearelie ponished, & that noe diceinge 
4 or other vnlawfull games be admitted for that most 

comonlie the same is the begynninge of quarrellinge and many 
tymes murther a iust occasion of Godf wrath and vengeance 
from w ch the Lord deliu r vs. Therefore it shall be needfull that 
such orders be sett vp and published in each shipp and such 
punishm* appointed for such offencf as may giue notice to eu r y 
man what he ought to avoied. 

Item that spetiall order be geven that noe liquo r be spilt 
T u J J lbstaine from m the ballast of the shipps, or filthines be left 

shedding liquor in 

the Baiiast & for w thj n bourd, w ch in heate breadeth noysome smells 

keeping the shipps J 

cleane & infeccon but that there be a diligent care to 



242 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

keepe the ou r lopps & other places of the shipps cleane and 
sweete w ch is a notable preservacon of health, wherein the 
Dutchmen doe farr exceede vs in cleanlines to their greate 
Comendacons & disgrace to o r People. 

Item that Continuall and true lournalls be kept of eu r y daies 
ffor keepinge lour- Course & Nauigacon during the whole voyadge 
6 w th a true relacon of eu r y thinge, that passeth & 

this not onelie to be done by the seu r all Captaines, m rs , Pilattf & 
m rs matf but alsoe by the m r chauntc and Pursars, & that some of 
the principalls in each shipp may Conferr together at convenient 
tymes, when the Generall shall call them, therevnto, to thend 
that if any haue forgotten what an other obserued, the same may 
be added soe as a .pfect discourse may be sett downe, to be 
presented to the Gou r no r and Companie when god shall grante 
them a saffe retourne, to be kept for better direccon of posteritie. 

Item that the Generall & m r of his shipp doe sett downe 
ffor keepinge Com- & deliu r sucn instruccons to the Comanders of 
panic at sea. thother shipp that they may keepe Companie 

together for the better releife and Comforte one 
of an other, And if separacon of them should happen by 
Constrainte of weather or Tempest that they should agree vpon 
a course before hand, & of a place whither to applie their selues 
to finde each other. 

Item that the Gen r all Leiutenante & m rs of the shipps take 
due notice by Inventory from eu r y Officer of the 

To settle the seurall iri r 1 O-M r i 

provisions in each shipps oeiore they deptc out of the I names ol the 

mans chardge after . . 

they shaii come to seu r all provisions delm r ed to each shipp & soe 

Sea & to deliur * * r 

nothinge out wth Ou t sone as they shall come to Sea & not before to 

warrant for w<=h they * 

abie to vpon Wns theTr settle tne same m tne chardge of the Officers 
wages - 8 appointed for that purpose in either shipp vntill 

w ch tyme all stores are to remaine vnder locke 
and key and that the same be entred in the Pursars Bookf vnder 
written by the said Officers, to thend that such thingf as are 
provided for their needfull supplies may not be ymbecilled, & that 
nothinge thereof of any value be ymployed for any vse whatsoeu 1 
w th out a warrante vnder the hand of the Generall directed to the 
Officer that hath such chardge, w ch warrante shall serue for their 
dischardge in their Accomptf , otherwise to be awnswearable for 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 243 

the same w th their wagf, & eu r y such warrant to be registred 
in the Pursars Booke the day of the monneth & the occasion & 
this vpon forfecture of soe much out of the Pursars wage, this 
order to be obserued alsoe in each of the shipps by the Comanders 
m rs Pursars & Officers as aforesaid, that at the retourne of the 
said shipps a true Accompt may be yealded howe and in what 
mann r the same haue beene vsed & ymployed. 

And whereas the stragling of yo r men in any place where they 
shall arriue or come may proue not onelie the 

Not to straggle j osse Qf ^^ ^ ^j ^ straggle Chough they 

shall be Armed, but alsoe thereby much hurte 
may happen to the Residue of o r People & generallie to the 
whole Companie. Yt is ordered that you doe not pmitt any man 
in any place where you shall come (vpon what ground soeu r ) to 
straggle or goe from the Residue of yo r Companies vnlesse they 
be by you first warranted therevnto, & that vpon iust occasion, 
vpon paine of seveare ponishment to be inflicted of such as shall 
doe the Contrarie still doubtinge the worst and standinge vpon yo r 
guarde night and day in eu r y place where you shall come w th out 
yealdinge any trust to those People. 

Item we Comend vnto you the Generall principallie & to the 

rest of the Comanders and m rs : an espetiall care 

what is to be obserued 

at wateringe that at eu r y place where you shall water and refresh 

yo r men you call the Companies together geueing 
them seveare warninge to behaue them selues peaceablie and 
Ciuillie toward^ the People of that place the better to pcure their 
freindshipp toward^ the supplie of yo r wantf, & the like in eu r y 
place wheare you come, least the losse of yo r Hues & ou r throwe of 
o r voyadge pay for yo 1 ' disorders, besidf an vtter discreditt to o r 
Nacon, and that yo r men doe vse a discreete meane in eatinge of 
fruity and fresh victualls least the surfett & fall into diseases, 
whereof we haue had too much experience. And the better to 
refraine vnrulie appetitf we hould it Convenient that the Generall 
appointe some of the discreetest in the Companies to procure & 
prouide in such places what you wante, and the same being 
prouided and brought to the Generall, by him to be repted 1 to 
each Companie what may be needfull, and that none presume to 

* Reparted. 

R I 



2 44 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

doe the Contrarie w th out seueare ponishm 1 , And that a spetiall 
care be had to releeue the sicke w th such fresh meatf & other 
Comfortable thingf wherew th we haue furnished each shipp for 
that purpose, & not otherwyse to be spent in Royott and ban- 
quettinge, & soe the sicke .pishe for wante of thingf needfull : 
Yet o r expresse order is that yo u neu r putt into any Harbo r w th out 
greate occasion, & then vpon c r teine knowledge of the Securitie of 
the place and vigilent care night and day to prevent Dangers 
takeing espetiall notice from place to place of the Course of the 
Monsomes for yo r better direccons if you shall haue occasion to 
goe to diu r s places. 

Item for the fittest place of refreshinge we wish you to 
TO water at st s shape yo r Course to the Porte of S* Augustine in 
t J h nnaL s &^ the Hand of S 4 Lawrence, where you shall finde 
c aTt e erfd! r a eTco S ns Lan ' good Harbo' & plentie of victualls, in w ch place 
it will not be fitt to make longe aboade but make 
hast and endevo r to be vpon the Coaste of Melindein the monneth 
of lulie at the {furthest, but for yo r better direccon therein we 
referr you to the instruccons of S r lames Lancaster 1 now deliu r ed 
you herew th , whoe can best direct you for yo r course vpon that 
Coaste by his owne experience, except yo u in yo r discrecons finde 
otherwyse more fitt : still standinge vpon yo r guarde in eu r y place 
w th out yealding any trust to those People. At w ch place alsoe we 
hould it fitt, & tyme will then best serue to that effect, that you 
settogether and make readie yo r Pinnace the w ch yo u carrie w th 
you, & alsoe you may heare informe yo r selues if o r shipps & men 
sent the last yeare haue beene theare, when, & w dl way they 
tooke &c : for better direccon of the Busines you are now sent 
aboute as occasion shall serue. 

ITEM after yo r denture from the Porte of S 4 Augustine 
towardf the Coast of Melynde beware of the 

Beware of the fflattes ._ . . . T 1 i r 

of the coast of fflattf of ludea 3 w ch he betweene the Hand of 

Melinde,& what they 1011 

. S* Lawrence & the firme land : vpon w ch 



it is said that the Currantf doe sett. There is 
alsoe an Hand vpon the Coaste of Melinde verie fitt for refresh- 
inge yo r people as we are informed & whereof the Hollenders 
had experience in their last voyadge that way : The w ch Hand is 

1 See page 136, ? See page 118. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 245 

called Zinzabar where if you finde it needfull & haue tyme for 
that purpose you may theare water and refresh yo r Companies, 
els not. And alsoe it shall not be amisse as you saile alonge 
w th out staye in any place or goeinge a shoare to buie some 
Oliphauntf Teeth w ch are bought at Mozambique & on the 
Coaste of Melinde in greate abondance, and carried into the 
Indies. That Commoditie is exceedinglie requested in Cambaia 
alsoe stoare of Ambergreece is likewise to be had in the Coaste 
of Melinde and at S* Lawrence Hand : But goe not either to 
Mozambique nor to the Hand of Pemba in any hand but leaue 
it on yo r larbo r side. 

It is further ordered that all the way alonge as you saile, or 
TO make diligent in- wheare you shall come you doe yo r best endevo r 
needLif a11 th[nses to vnderstand what good saffe Harbo 1 ' 3 are in 
each place to be had for vs to trust vnto, for 
maintenance of a Trade in those .ptf in saffetie from danger of 
Portugalls or others : vnder whome in each place the People are 
in subiection : & of what nature they are : what havens they be, 
of what condicon & vnder whose Comand, together w th the 
dangers & depthes of waters in each place for passadge what 
trade may be thear had, the sortf prices and goodnes of Comodi- 
ties, as alsoe what sortf of o rs are there best requested as likewyse 
by what speedie meanes you may send or bringe vs tres ou r land 
of what shall be fitt for vs to haue knowledge of by way of Turkic 
or otherwise, and for yo r better saffetie in yo r passadge therein 
(if need be) we haue pcured you his ma tie3 : saffe Conduct 1 the 
w ch we haue geven to you the Generall to be deliu r ed to such as 
shall be vsed in this respect, endevoring as Convenientlie you 
may w th out any ympedim* to yo r voyadge findinge thingf promt- 
able, to vse the best meanes to drawe the people vnto you in 
their lunckf or Boatf w tb some of their m r chandize for w ch you 
may assay to barter some of o r owne, or sell and buie as you shall 
see occasion : As alsoe endevoringe to doe & vnderstand what 
ells shall be for the Comon good of the Companie, & for future 
experience. 

ITEM it is expresslie ordered that by a Generall Consent, of 

1 See page 232, 



24 6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

some order to be sett you the Generall Captaine ffacto" Masters & 

downe touching dead * 

mens goodes Manners some good order be by you taken & sett 

downe in writeinge soe soone as you come to Sea, 
conc r ninge the disposeing of dead mens goodf in the voyadge, by 
sale at the Maste, or otherwise for buieinge sellinge borrowinge & 
lendinge one an other, & ordering what sallarie shall be 
allowed the Pursars vpon eu r y pound for keepinge Accompt 
thereof to avoied Controu r sie and Question hereafter, & eu r y 
Manner and other of each shipp to sett their hand or marke vnto 
the same order. But if any ffacto r shall happen to die his goodf, 
Bookf , Accomptf, & other things are to be by order of the 
Generall and Leiuetenant Generall saffelie reserued & brought 
home for England. 

Item for better preseruacon of health o r order is that from 
tyme to tyme as the water Caske shall be emptied 

ffor better prservacon r r i 1 r i , r-n t M* IA. 

of health by wash- of fresh water it be forthw th agame filled w th salt 

s %. water for prevencon of leakeinge and Mustines 

Item o r direccon is that you make diligent inquirie at S l 

ffor inquirie for the Lawrence & Zinzabar, & all other places in yo r 

suzan. ^ passadge and retourne of Tydingf of the Suzan: 1 

or if any English shipp hath beene of late w th in 

theis two yeares either cast away or taken, or putt in for reliefe in 

any of those ptf & receiueing any knowledge of her to vse the 

best meanes you may for recou'y of her, her men, and goodf, 

Soe as it may be noe way p r iudicious to yo r proceeding^ in yo r 

voyadge. 

Item haueing refreshed yo r People w th all speede you are to 

shape yo r course fo r Zocotora nere the mouth of 

zocafna fc KM to the Red Sea, where is alsoe good refreshinge & 

Aden & Moccha . . . 

comeinge in tyme (as is said) the best Alices Sacatnna in the world 

els not & what they ... . ' r 

are to do theare & likewise stoare of Amber greece, & other thingf 

whereof we pray you to take notice, & buie thereof, 
what you shall see convenient but still in all yo r m r chandizeing, 
be carefull to putt of yo r English Comodities in Trucke. In this 
Hand we doubt not but you may be furnished both w th Pilottf for 
Aden : Or if the same be not fitt for trade by reason as it is 
reported vnto vs the same is a Garrison Towne rather of Souldiers 

1 See note, page 134. 



THE EAST IXDIA COMPANY. 247 

then Marchauntf. 1 Then you are to goe for Moccha a Towne 

10 miles from Aden said to be a place of speciall trade right ouer 
against w cl1 Towne there is an Hand called Kedgee where is alsoe 
reported to be good Harbo r and wateringe (if need shall soe 
requier) and vnderstandinge what trade there is to be had, what 
the People be and of what interteinm*: toward strangers, whereof 
informe yo r selues in the best manner you may, as alsoe if o r 
shipps and men sent thither the last yeare haue been at Aden, or 

1 This paragraph, as well as some of those that follow, is so evidently based 
upon the information given by Sir Edward Michelborne in his interview with the 
Company, that it has been thought well to give in extenso the interesting account 
entered on the Court Minutes of 26th Jan., 1607/8 : 

" Att this Courte S r Edward Michelborne as form r liehe had promysed appeareing, 
" declared that for the desier he had to ymparte his knowledge vnto them for the 
" Good of the Company, he was now come hither, whoe signiefied as followeth. 

" ffirst that by experience he had found that mens healthes were best p r served by 
" labo 1 ' and refreshinge out of the shipps &in the hotest places by plentie of meate 
"and drinke then espetiallie to be yealded them, keepeth their Bodies freest from 
" diseases. 

" Then that much perrill and small hope of trade may be expected at Aden, yt 
" being a Garrison Towne of Souldiers, rather then of Marchauntes, yett neare to 
" Aden aboute some 10 miles of, there is a Towne (as yt seemeth he is informed) 
" called Moccha, gou r ned w th m r chauntes onelie, and a place of spetiall trade right 
" ou r against w ch there is an Hand called Kedgee, wherein is good Harbo 1 ' & watering 
" yf need require. 

" Then that by noe meanes o r shipps and men can goe saffelie to Suratt, or theare 
"expect any quiett trade for the many dangers likelie to happen vnto them by the 
" Portugalls, Cheeff Comanders of Diu and Demon & places there aboute very stronge 
" & hath the sole Comand of those Seas, all the people theare paying them tribute & 
" the kinge of Cambaia recydeth twoe monnethes iorney from Suratt & the Barr 
" shallow. 

" But he saith there is a place not farr thence, twoe daies saileinge from Suratt, 
" called Lawrie [see p. 251] in the Bay of the River Syndus, wheare is good Harbo r in 
' ' saffetie ; Twoe miles from w ch vp in the Bay there is a greate Cittie like London called 
" Nigertuttie [see p. 252], where is plentie of Indico Callico & diu r s m r chandize, the 
" people there are free onelie gou r ned by kinge Acabar whoe resideth at Agree some 
" ffortie miles from Nigertuttie at w ch the Portugalls haue nothing to doe but onelie 
" come thither for m r chandize as other Strangers, where he conceiueth yf o r People 
" doe goe thither behaueing them selues well they will find ample and proffitable 
" trade aswell of their Comodities as for vent of o ra , at w ch place Cloth is in greate 
" request, of the particulars whereof, he will be readie to informe m r Sharpie & 
" m r Rowles more at lardge. 

" He alsoe declared that lecketta is afitt place to right o r selues of such of those 

11 people that should offer vs any wronge, the w ch place is scituate in the River Syndus 
" but for the fittest tyme of the yeare to that purpose, he is vnwillinge to declare." 



$ 4 g FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

theare about?, & beinge theare what they haue done, and soe 
findinge of trade and interteinm* w th all convenient speede you are 
to direct yo r course for Aden or Moccha or some other place 
theareabout? w ch you may learne to be more fitter for trade and 
interteynm*, Soe alwaies Provided you come thither about the 
fine of lulie, or in such tyme (if need be) as you may goe thence 
w th that Monsone for Surate or Bantam, the w ch we conceiue you 
may verie well pforme yf (you findinge not thing? there to yo r 
likeinge,) you make noe staye theare but w tb all speede depte 
thence for Surate by the 2Oth of September at the furthest the w ch 
you are in any case to doe ells you shall loose the oportunitie 
of that Monsone, where vnto you are both in goeing and 
retourninge to haue an espetiall care. And beinge arriued neare 
the place, come to an Anco r but take heed in any Case you come 
not w th in their danger, still expecting and feareing evill though 
there be noe cause. And comeing thither first you 
are to vse meanes (if any of o r People be theare [)] to 
deliu r o r Ires 1 by you sent accordinge to the direccon to m r Wiftm 
Hawkins or to the cheefe of o r men w ch shall be theare lefte, & 
therevpon to Conferr together w th them and vnderstand what 
they haue done aboute the deliu r y of o r king? ma*? tres sent by 
them to the Gou r no r of that place w th a Present as alsoe for their 
quiett trade &c : That you may the better pceede w th good aduice 
to doe accordinglie, aswell for deliu r y of his ma ties tres now sent 
by you to the Gou r no r of Aden or Moccha w th some Convenient 
present as otherwise as theare shall be occasion, and w th all you 
are to signifie vnto such of o r men as you shall finde there that 
this fowerthe voyadge is solie one ioincte stocke seuerall from the 
former Voyadg? yet sett out by some of the same Companie 
authorized and allowed therevnto by the rest accordinge to the 
Teno r of the same Ire now by vs sent vnto them, & accordinglie 
throughout all the whole voyadge you are to keepe Accompt of 
the same as a ioincte stocke of it selfe, sett out by vs seu r allie 
from all the former voyadg? for those pt?. And further if thing? 
soe stand there as it shall be needfull, you may make it knowne 
to the Gou r no r of the place as we haue form r lie geven order to o r 
men to doe (that is) that you are English m r chaunt? & haue 

1 See page 236. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 249 

brought ires vnto him from o r kingf ma tie : seekeinge onlie peace- 
able trade, aswell for saile of o r Comodities as for buieinge of 
theirs. And therew th all to deliu r the same tres w th such present 
as you shall thinke fitt to the said Gou r no r w th whome (as you 
shall see cause) you may treate for Priuiledgf and freedome of 
trade for as many Yeares as you can, if it be not by o r men 
form r lie done or needfull to be enlardged declaringe that o r kinge 
is in League w th the Grandsignio r That o r People doe trade into 
Cairo, Aleppo, Damasko, Constantinople, & in all other his 
Dominions freelie and that o r kinge hath now a lidger 
Irnbassado r in Constantinople, w ch loue of the Grand Signio r 
toward^ o r Nacon, hath ymbouldened vs to visitt that place w th o r 
shipps and goodf now desieringe by his favorable lycence to trade 
as Ciuill & peaceable m r chant & that you desier to settle a 
ffactorie theare, yf by his honorable favo r you may be pmitted, 
assureing him that by o r trade his Customes will be greatelie 
increased for that we shall endevo r to fetch that from thence w ch 
we now fetch from the Molloccos Bantam & diu r s other places in 
the Indies. To w dl if he Yeald it shall be needfull that you craue 
such articles of Priuiledgf from him in writeinge for o r Nacon the 
better to incurradge vs to frequent that place. And for yo r better 
direccon we haue deliu r ed you the Coppie of Priuiledgf procured 
for vs by S r lames Lancaster from the Kinge of Achen, addinge 
therevnto what other thinge shall be needfull. And further if 
you shall see cause you may make the Gou r no r acquainted w th 
what sortf of English Comodities you haue now brought thither, 
but not (yf it may be) w th any of yo r moneys vntill yo r Comodities 
be first sould, at w ch place we choose rather to be, then to make 
triall of any other if possiblie we may. 

Item arriueinge at Aden or Moccha & findinge good hope of 
interteynement & trade whereby either presentlie 

ffor better sale of o' , , , f . 

Comodities & buie- or in some shorte space by the retourne or their 
Alen. lounckf from Cambaia you may vent o r English 

Comodities, & finde fitt and sufficient ladeinge 
there for retournes, we wish you that in the buieinge thereof that 
you be verie carefull to make choise of that w ch is good and fitt 
for sale, & in sale of o r Comodities that you stand vpon the value 
& estimacon thereof, Yet soe as you loose not the oportunitie of 



15 o FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

the first m r kett & reasonable offers least by often veiwinge them 
they fall to dislike, for Nouelties as you knowe drawe men to 
buie : and note that by the repaier of all sortf of People thither 
you shall finde meanes to sell what Comodities of o rs are in any 
place requested yf you putt yo r selues forward, & by helpe of 
some Brokers you seeke to deale : But you must be carefull to 
vse all men w th kindnes and Ciuillitie, and see that yo r men doe 
the like in any wise, least disorders and scandalous behauio r 
cause you to be abhorred and evill intreated. At w ch place as we 
esteeme it to be the most saffest nearest and cheeffest place for 
trade we desier rather to be, then at any other, if we may there 
soe finde profitable and sufficient trade in saffetie as aforesaid. 

Item if you finde theare that any of o r Comodities or Colo 
ttor Adverticement w ^ se ^ better then those we now send, or some 
& u by^hat me e anes be ^ those more vendible then the rest we desier to 
IQ - be adverticed ou r land by some Moores that goe 

to Argier Aleppo or Alexandria and direct yo r ires to Richard 
Allen Consull at Argier to be sent hither w th speede, or to Aleppo 
to m r Paule Pyndar 1 Consull or to 2 at Alexandria or any 

other English men that be there obserueing the notf of a 
Caracter w ch we deliu r you herew th for better secrecie And not to 
be backward or slacke by eu r y Conveyaunce to write least some 
tres miscarrieinge others may come to hand. 

And haueinge procured the dispatch of o r shipps w th their 
procured ^ ladeinge our direccon is that you retourne for 
E A n d gia n nd. England w l the next fitt winde and weather 
leaueing there for facto rs if you thinke needfull 2 

S3T noe ffacto" 
names put into 
theis spaces left. 

and such others as you thinke meete w th some convenient 
allowance & likewise w th order to ymploye their endevo 1 ' 3 
for findinge out of further trade aswell for all sorts of 
Cloth and Kersies and Colo", best requested, as all other of 
o r Comodities and for the buieing of all those Countrie 
wares obserueing still good and c r teine notf of all sortf of 
Comodities brought hither from out of the East Indies : But if 

1 See page 122, note. 8 Blank in MS. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 251 

after yo r arriuall to Aden or Moccha you shall happen not to 
finde sufficient meanes theare to relade home both yo r shipps (as at 
first you expected) but onelie one of them, nor any hope of further 
trade there likelie in any good tyme to be made, then o r will is you 
should w th all expedicon send home one of yo r shipps soe laden for 
England vnder the Comand of o r Leiuetenante 
Gen r all & thother to goe forward for Cambaia or 
Bantam as the tyme shall be fitt therevnto, & there shall be 
convenient stocke to doe the same. Betweene w dl place at the 
mouth of the Red Sea & Cambaia & in the River Syndus as we 
are informed there is noe doubt of Ample and beneficiall trade in 
saffetie yf you make diligent search and inquirie for the same 
wherein we pray you to haue espetiall care. And for yo r better 
pceedingf therein w th any Prince or Gou r no r you may finde vnto 
whome you haue not tres alreadie directed vnto them from o r 
kingf ma tie : we haue pcured you tres from his ma tie : w th gen r all 
termes in the inside & w th Blanckf on the outside to be by you 
directed to any such Prince or Gou r no r if you shall happen to 
haue occasion : But before yo v depture one from annother the 
Leiuetenante Generall is to call vnto you the Generall for the 
duplicate of his ma ties : Comission vnder the broad Seale for 
better Gou r nment of his men homewardf . 

But yf it shall soe happen you come not to Zocotora in such 
due tyme as you may convenientlie goe to Aden 

Comeing not to Zo- . 

cotora in due tyme & haue that Monsone to brmge you into the 

to goe for Aden, to 

1 , eaue 1 . A den & goe Indies (if need be) doe not then at any hand goe 

directlie for Cambaia J 

& there to foiiowe to Aden or Moccha but saile directlie towardf 

this & the next en- 

sueing orders. Surate the entrance of Cambaia, where if you 

come aboute the middle of September you shall 
finde it Somer and faier weather soe as you may saffelie ride in 
the open Roade. But if the same place shall not be found fitt for 
trade according to o r expectacon by reason of some dangers that 
may happen vnto you by the Portugalls of Diu and Demon 1 whoe 
as is said haue the Comand of those Seas & receiue tribute of the 
People of those placf, Then you are to saile for Lawrie 2 in the 

1 Daman, in Gujarat, still (like Diu) in the possession of the Portuguese. 

2 Lahori Bandar, on the south or left bank of the Baghiar or western branch of 
the Indus, 20 miles from the Piti mouth. Though formerly the principal port of 



252 FIRST LETTER BOOK 0^ 

Bay of the River Syndus. aboute 2 dales saileing from Surate, 
where, as we are informed is good Harbo r in saffetie w th in 2 miles 
of w ch Towne vp in that Bay there is a greate Cittie as bigg as 
London called Negertuttie, 1 where is plentie of Indico Callicoes & 
diu r s other m r chandizes fitt for England the people whereof are 
free, onelie gou r ned by the kinge of 2 Arcabar whoe recideth at 
Agree some fortie English Miles from Negertuttie, at w ch place 
the Portugalls haue nothinge to doe, but onelie come thither for 
m r chandize, as other strangers, where it is conceyued if you 
behaue yo r selues well and gentlie toward^ those people you will 
finde ample and profitable trade aswell of their Comodities as for 
vent of o r Comodities theare, where it is reported Clothes of all 
sortf is in great request. At w cb place or places if vpon diligent 
inquirie you shall finde a c r teine and saffe expectacon of trade & 
that o r shipps may goe into saffe Harbo" free from danger of the 
Portugalls or any other : Then you are to staye in the open 
Roade neare the Barr of Cambaia or at Lawrie & by some of the 
People w ch come out eu r y Tyde from thence, or otherwise we wish 
you to doe yo r best endevo rs to vnderstand yf o r shipps and men 
sent for those t the last yeare, haue beene there, & being there 
what they haue done, & soe fmdinge hope of saffetie & intertein- 
ment to send word to some of o r men (yf any shall be there) that 
you are arriued wishing to haue Conference w th them before you 
make yo r comeing knowne to the Gou r no r of that place aswell 
conc r ninge what they haue done in the deliu r y of o r kingf ma tie8 : 
tres by them sent to the kinge of Cambaia & Present as otherwise 
of what hope of interteinm* & quiett trade may be there expected 
that therevpon you may proceed w th good advice to doe accord- 

Sind, it has now fallen into complete decay, in consequence of the channel on which 
it is situated having ceased to be navigable. Hamilton in his New Account of the East 
Indies (1727) describes it as a village of about 100 houses, built of crooked sticks and 
mud, with a large stone fort mounting four or five guns. The harbour was accessible 
to ships of 200 tons burden, and a brisk trade was carried on. 

1 Nagar Thato, the native name of Tatta, a town on the Indus in the Karachi 
district of Sind. It is now sadly shorn of its former glories. Hamilton, who visited 
it in 1699, speaks of it as "the emporium of the province, a very large and rich city ; " 
and he estimates its dimensions at that time as about three miles long, and one and 
a half broad. The East India Company had for some time a factory there. 

3 This is the copyist's improvement upon Sir Edward Michelborne's "king 
Acabar " (see note, page 247). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 253 

inglie for deliu r y of o r kingf? ma ties : tres & Present now alsoe by 
you sent to the kinge of Cambaia as for the obtayneinge of quiett 
trade & otherwise as there shall be occasion. And comeinge 
thither & findinge some of o r men theare you are to deliu r o r tres 
now sent vnto them accordinge to the direccon, & to signifie vnto 
them that this voyadge is solie one ioinct stocke seu r all from the 
former voyadgf , and yett sett out by some of the same Company 
authorized and allowed therevnto by the rest, accordinge to the 
Teno r of the same ire from vs vnto them, 1 & accordingelie through 
out all the whole voyadge you are to keepe Accompt of the same 
as of a ioincte stocke of it selfe by vs sett out seu r all from all the 
form r voyadgf as is before specified in the 17 Article. 

But if none of o r men be theare, & notw th standing there be 
vpon informacon good hope of quiett trade, & 
kinde interteinem* in saffetie. Then at your 
arriuall as aforesaid you are neu r thelesse to send word to the 
Gou r no rs or Comanders there that there is a Messenger arriued 
w th tres from the kingf ma tie : of England vnto their kinge praying 
the Gou r no rs to send them a boate w th saffe Conveyaunce. And 
if any come to you from the Gou r no rs Then we thinke it fitt 
that you the Generall doe repaier thither takeing w th you his 
ma ties : tres & Present^ & such other provisions as you haue for 
that purpose, & in yo r Companie take w th you twoe of o r ffacto" 
Reaue 1 and lourdan & yo r owne servant whoe are apprelled to 
that effect or whome els you shall finde most meete for that 
purpose, & comeinge to the Gou r no r of Surate or Lawrie present 
him w th some guifte what you shall thinke meete, & desier them 
to assist you w th meanes and guidf to their kinge that you may 
deliu r his ma^ said tres & present vnto that kinge craue a 
speedie awnsweare and his ma ties : resolucon if he will be pleased or 
not to grante you free and saffe trade in his Countries and 
Harbo 1 ' 3 accordinge to the Teno r of his ma^: said trew th sufficient 
defence against those that shall practise to ympeach or hinder 
the same, or annoy or hurte any of the shipps Bodies or goodf of 

1 Seepage 237. 

2 Richard Reave was chosen factor, for his skill in trade and languages, on 22nd 
Jan., 1607/8. He was, with Captain Rowles and several others, treacherously slain 
by the natives in Madagascar on the outward voyage, 



2 54 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

any of o r Nacon. And the better to induce the kinge to grante 
vs Priviledgf and free trade signifie that we will be readie to 
bringe him Armo r and other municon from tyme to tyme in o r 
seu r all voyadgf for the better inablinge him against his Enimyes 
besidf the increase of his Customes w ch will be greater for that 
thereby we shall fetch that from thence w ch we now fetch from 
the Molloccos Bantam and diu rs other places in the Indies, & 
that you seeke onelie peaceable trade aswell for buieinge of their 
Comodities as for sale of yo r owne, w cl ' if he promyse to doe, then 
desier to haue Comissioners appointed to Consider w th you of 
Articles in writeinge for setlinge of a ffactorie (yf need be) & for 
PriuiledgC of Trade for as many yeares as you can procure to be 
granted to o r Nacon the better to incourradge vs to frequent his 
kingdomes yf the same be not form'lie pcured by o r men not 1 
needfull further to be inlardged. And for yo r better direccon 
therein, we haue deliu r ed you the foresaid Coppie of the Priviledgf 
form r lie procured for vs by S r : lames Lancaster from the kinge of 
Achen, 2 addinge thervnto what other thingf shall be needfull : w ch 
Priviledgf beinge obtayned and signed by the kinge, haueinge 
taken yo r leaue in Comelie manner, and receiued such Comoonde- 
m^ in writeinge directed to his Gou r no rs and Officers of his 
Townes and Portf, as you can pcure for yo r defence against 
all disturbers of you in yo r peaceable trade. And for their 
Assistance of you & kinde interteinm* in the same, yo u are w th all 
speede to make yo r retourne to Surate or to Lawrie afore- 
mencioned : And haueing deliu r ed that kingf Comandement to 
the Gou r no r and Officers there craue their Assistance w th Pilottf 
& saffe Conduccon of yo r shipps & therew tb make all the expedicon 
you can to gett into the Harbo r : But first shewe to some trustie 
Brokers, paterns of such yo r Clothes kersies and other Comodities 
as are in o r shipps, whereof, as of such moneys we haue nowe 
sent you haue 3 an Invoice, takeinge knowledge w ch sorte of those 
Comodities wilbe theare best sold & accordinglie giue order for 
fetching of them a shoare in saffe manner. And further if you 
shall see cause you make the Gou r no r9 acquainted w th what sortf 
of English Comodities you haue now brought thither but not (yf 

1 Or ? 2 See page 69. 

3 Probably " here " is intended. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 255 

otherwise possiblie) w u ' any of yo r moneys vntill yo r Comodities 
be first sold. 

And findinge that you may vent o r English Comodities & 
fiindinge vent att finde pffitable and sufficient ladinge there for 
5StE?ftf?E retournes as Indico, Cotton yarne fine Callicoes 
EngTa^whl^tS Opium Gumlacre Beniamyn Muske Sivitt Amber 
Ktefnge ther r eof. le & Mirr, Olibinum, pretious stones Bezars &c: we 
wish you that in the buieinge thereof you be verie 
carefull to make choise of that w dl is good & fitt for sale, & in 
sale of o r Comodities that you stand vpon the value and estimacon 
thereof as in the i8 th Article. 

And haueing procured the dispatch of o r shipps w th their full 
Hanemg procured yo ladeinge at Surate or Lawrie or theareaboute of 
baS'to some profitable Comodities as aforesaid the 
16 and most ptf whereof to be Indico yo u are to retourne 
34 for England w th the next fitt wynde and weather 

leaueing there for ffactor rs (if you shall thinke needfull) 1 

And such others as you shall appointe w th some convenient 
allowance, & likewise w th order to ymploy all their endevo rs for 
fmdinge out of further trade aswell for all sortf of Clothes & 
kersies as their Colo 1 ' 8 best requested as all other of o r Comodities, 
& for the buieinge of those Countrie wares obserueinge still good 
& c r teine notf of all sortf of Comodities there to be sould as is 
form r lie mencioned in the 2o th Article. Wheare alsoe before yo r 
retourne for England yo 11 are accordinge to yo r direccon in the 
17 th article to take the best informacon you can of the state of 
Aden, as what Harbo and Pilottf to bringe men in, are theare to 
be had what Condicon the People are of what trade & what inter- 
teinem* towardf strangers, what thingf will be there vendible & 
saleable &c : & what els shall be needfull to be knowne in that 
respect, & to acquainte vs therew th for o r better knowledge what to 
doe if hereafter at any tyme we shall thinke good to visitt that place. 

But if after yo r arriuall to Surate or Lawrie or thereabout 
findinge ladinge but you shall happen not to finde fitt and sufficient 
he r r n h e o s me pp by se the ladinge theare to relade home both yo r shipps as 

Leiuetenante Gen r all /-. j i <- , 

8? the duplicate of you first expected but onelie one of them, nor any 
1 There is a blank space here in the MS. 



256 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

his macomission hope of ffurther trade there likelie in any reason- 

& send the other for * J 

buTaoo^H su>cke n to a ^ e tyme to be made, then o r will is if you haue 
reiade her thence. but left of o r stocke sent w th you to the some of 
2OOO U in moneys or in such Pinthadoes or Calli- 
coes as you shall there puide for Bantam & the Molloccos you 
shall w th all expedicon send home for England, one of yo T said 
shipps soe laden vnder the Comand of o r Leiuetenante Generall 
whoe before his depture from you is to call vnto you the Generall 
for the duplicate of his ma^ : Comission vnder the Broade scale 
for the gou'nm* of his men homeward^ as aforesaid and the other 
shipp w th all expedicon to goe directlie thence for Bantam for 
better pformance whereof, you are soe to order yo r affaires at 
Surate, That you may be suer (if need be) you may haue the 
Monsone to bringe you thither. 

But if at yo r being at Surate or Lawrie or theareaboutf you 
shall haue occasion by the Costlines of the 

If all the stock nowe . . i n ,1 i i 

sent will fume lade Comodities you shall theare puide to ymploy 

both the shipps then , r o ~ i- i 11 

it is to be putt in all o r stocke of moneys & Comodities you shall 

both & retourned for . * J 

England. now came w th you, for such profitable Comodi- 

ties of those placf as is before mencioned, & the 
same will not be sufficient fullie to reiade both the shipps home, 
Then o r will is you lade the same Comodities so bought in both 
the shipps equallie accordinge to their Bourthen & retourne w th 
all expedicon directlie for England leaueing there some ffacto 1 ' 8 w th 
Convenient allowance yf you shall thinke meete as aforesaid. 

But yf at Surate or Lawrie or theareaboutf you be not kindlie 
dealt w th all nor cannott by any meanes finde inter- 

But findinge not <* <* 

teinm 1 in saffetie or sufficient Comoditie to reiade 



one OT ^ ot ^ ^ y T sm pps home. Then you are 
37 w th both the shipps and Pinnace to shape yo r 

course alonge the Coaste of Mallabar w th that Monsone for 
Bantam w th such Pinthadoes and Callicoes as you can gett for 
those placf where you haueinge deliu r ed our ires accordinge to 
the direccon of o r ffacto 1 ' 3 at Bantam & made them acquainted 
that what we now send is a ioincte stocke seu r allie of it selfe, 
accordinge to the Teno r of o r said tre as before is mencioned in 
the 12 l & 17 Articles we referr you to Consider w th them theare 

l tt? 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 257 

what is best to be done wherein vsinge such direccons for yo r 
reladeinge homewardf as you shall be then best advised : either 
w th Mace Nutmeggf & Cloues at the Mollocos, or w th the same 
and Pepp. Wherein alsoe you are to remember and foresee 
that in ladeing those Comodities you buie such as are drie & 
not greene, & that you cleanse them what you can that the 
ships be not stuffed w th such vnproffitable ware as is not worth 
the Custome, wherein we pray you to omitt noe tyme. 

Item be verie carefull that you haue yo r due weight & the 
see you haue yo r same putt into Baggf nombred and m r ked & 
Sb^&mS" sent abourd the shipps w th some of the ffacto rs or 
some other trustie psons w th a note conteyneinge 
the pticuler of eu r y Bagge vnder the nomber, the same note to 
be deliu r ed to the Pursar whome we chardge to weigh eu r y Bagg 
at the takeing of it into the shipp, wherby he may see that the 
weight is accordinge to the note receiued, keepinge eu r y note & 
entringe the Content^ into his booke, whereby yf any erro r 
happen it may be found out w* 11 we wish you the Generall to 
examine eu r y night that there growe noe abuse. 

Item forasmuch as in former voyadgf soe now in this theare 

may be occasion for the benefitt of the Companie 

& can a ! e ef -se&cf iaU to make sale of some of yo r Victualls Canvesse 

or some other thing belonging to yo r stoare, or 

otherwise whereof you shall happen to haue noe neede. Yt is 

therefore ordered that good care be had that the same be done 

not onlie for the promtt of the Companie w th out any danger to 

the voyadge : But alsoe brought (as all other thingf) to the 

gen r all Accompt of the Companie. 

Item we chardge that the Pursar be continuallie abourd the 
shipp and take true notice of all thingf , whatsoeu r 

The Pursars chardge . 11- 

for keepeing a true are brought into the shipp or carried out, either 
thingcs brought in by the Gen r all Captaines, m rs : Mariners the Pursar 

& caried out of the 

shipps himselfe, or whosoeu 1 ' the same to be entred into 

30. 

his Booke vnder the name of the owner that 

eu r y one may haue his due at the retourne as the Pursar will 
awnsweare it w th the losse of his wagf and we pray the Generall 
and Captaines to geue the Pursar strict order for pformance 
thereof. 



2 5 3 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Item that there be but one hatch open (yf it may be) at the 

one hatch oneiie ladinge of either of the shipps & all the other 

of e "th a e * shijfps " & hatches lockt vpp & that the m r or one of his ma*e : 

!Sk e itlc: W rke to & the Pursar to stand by the open hatches when 

any goodf are shott into hould, lockinge the same 

Vpp when they haue left worke, the key to be geven to the 

Generall or Capteine to be kept. 

Item to be carefull that nothinge be bought but what is 

especiall good, & that you doe not ou r wett the 

& not to oiwett Cloues when they be laden, for ou r wett Cloues bad 

any of the Comodi- 

ties NutmeggC & Mace haue heretofore beene a greate 

hindrance vnto vs & taught vs to advise you to be 
more carefull. 

Item for that voyadges of this Condicon & greate chardge 
Toadmittnoepriuate cannot admitt any priuate trade o r will is that 
any 'Sthefs Soj" neither you the Generall nor any other vpon any 
!o e o yt P hTsa P m n e altie io pticular, or other Accompt, then the Generall and 
iointe stocke doe lade or deale w th any of those 
Comodities herevnder expressed Viz Pepp, Cloues, Nutmeggf, 
Mace, Synamon, Gynger, Indico, Callicoes, Amber greece, Muske, 
Alices, Beniamyn, and Gumlacre. And that yf any shall soe doe 
the same to be applied to the Accompt of the Companie as our 
propper goodf it beinge noe way reasonable that we should paie 
them their wage w th meate and drinke, & they lade those thingf 
in o r shipps w ch should defray o r chardge. 

Item in eu r y place where you come and trade Compare their 
weightf & measures w th o r3 before you buie, to 

To compare their 1 1 _ 10 

weightes & mea- thend you may knowe the better what to doe & 

sures wth o before . 

you buie. howe to make yo r reckoning^ for w ch purpose we 

haue put sundrie Chest C w th weightf into o r 
shipps. 

Item that there be the sumcientest and best aduiced of o r 
some of the ffacw ffacto appointed to weighe what is bought by 
SESlSbo^T 1 *^ weight on the land & to keepe a pfect Booke 
thereof, that the same may be nightlie conferred 
w th the Pursars Booke, whereby erro rs may be the better found 
out. 

Item that o r ffacto" bringe or send by the first shipps 8 or 10 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 259 

TO bringe some of o f the Dollers or Royalls w ch the Hollenders carrie 

the Dollo" the Holl- * 

endcrs carrie thither. thither 

Item we vtterlie forbidd any excessiue drinkeing feastinge or 
Against excessiue banquetinge abourd the shipps at Sea, or on land 
quettinfl. and * Ati ' ^ being a greate wast & Consumpcon of victualls 
and wyne, the cause of many diseases & disorders 
in the Companie, & therefore the same to be spent w th more 
discrecon and sparinge. 

Item remember to matt the insidf of the shipps before you 
TO matt the shipps P ut ^Y s pi ce vnto * them especiallie where you 
lade Cloues Pepp Nutmeggf and Mace, & be 
carefull to make choise of the Nutmeggf that they be lardg and 
sound, & at the lading thereof doe not lyme them too much for 
that doth burne them, 3 & beware yo u lay the Mace in Canisters in 
some fitt place by it selfe, that it be not spoyled by the heate of 
the other spices, takeing good heede to buie that w ch is bright & 
not withered nor red nor darke browne Colored, & such Cloues 
as shall be free of dust, the w ch those people vse to putt amongest 
them for their advantage in the weight. 

Item yf necessitie drawe you at the ladinge of the Cloues for 
better setlinge of them to cast water vpon them, 

To sprinkle the . 

39. for the purpose, like a wateringe pott for that too 

much wett in o r Cloues the last voyadge brought vs greate 
damadge. 

Item that if it be thought meete that a ffactorie be setled at 
Banda, Tomato or Tedore the better to advise 

To settle afactorie . 

& where if need he the Companie for trade as was form r lie thought 

& where Comodities 

are souid better fitt in the Comission geven to m r Kealinge & m r 

cheepe for gould 

then for money &c : Hawkins in the last Voyadge 3 you may leaue some 
to that purpose w th some small stocke if vpon due 
consideracon thereof at yo r being there, it shall be soe thought fitt. 
And seeing that by former Accomptf* it appeth that those of 
Luntor and Nere did sell their Cloues & Macf much better 
cheepe, to receiue their paym* in gould, then in Royalls namelie 
the Bahare of Nutmeggf for 9 Royalls & the Bahare of Mace for 

1 A mistake for " into." z See page 128, note. 3 See page 129. 

S I 



260 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

go Royalls in sylver: But payinge w th gould the Price of 
Nutmeggf but 7 Royalls & of Mace but 70. We therefore thinke 
it needfull that all meanes be vsed to sell o r Cornodities for Barter 
or gould & to finde out such place where gould may be had as 
especiallie as we are informed at the Hand of 
Nouaginnye 1 or ells where. 

Item that the Generall & Captaines geue often notice to the 
TO giue the ffacto ffacto rs & others what they are to obserue by this 
Sfat dg they ft are ?* T Comission w th espetiall chardge to the ffacto 
c b mSon by this to make diligent inquirie of what Cornodities are 
4I> to be bought or bartered for in each Hand, & 

what English m r chandize may be there vented, & of what kinde 
and Colo rs most vendable 

Item it is to be remembred that o r ffacto r3 at Bantam doe 
W hat O r ffactor. are ^ e ' ir best endevo rs to pcure the Cheneses to bring 
c hene scs&c: 0f the from Cheney sleaue and sowing silkf of the Color 
421 and Syces 2 we haue now deliu r ed to yo u the 

Generall as alsoe some rawe silkf that we may fall into some 
trade w th them & see yf they can sell any of o r English Cloth to 
them, that they may be brought to thuse thereof. 

Item for the quantities of money & m r chandize put into each 

An invoice. shipp we referr you to o r Invoice deliu r ed you 

herew th , w th the pticuler sortf Coullo 1 " 3 & prices w th 

paterns of all sortf whereby to make sale as is form r lie made 

mencon of in the 17 th Article. 

Item whereas heretofore the Companie haue receiued greate 
noe voiuntarie men wronge by the Gen r all & Captaines, m rs & 
8urh th as t0 shau b be Mariners admittance of voiuntarie men, to goe in 
auowedbythecom- Q r s hip ps , we hereby giue an espetiall chardge 
vnto you o r Generall Captaines & m rs : that you 
suffer none such to goe alonge w th you w dl put the Companie to 
chardge besidf many other Inconvenience, nor any but such as 
shall be allowed of by o r direction & whose names are entred into 
o r Bookf . 

And yf you shall see cause to leaue any of o r ffacto rs there we 
The piaceing or doe hereby order that the appointm* of them to 

1 See page 129, note. 2 Sizes. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 261 






of the recide in those places shall be at the direccon 

ffacto" at the dis- 

& e wha f thl are 'til ^^ ^iscrecon of you the Generall wherein we 
doe being^ieft. hope You will haue that Consideracon as to make 

choise of the fittest w ch shall be found able and 
meete to deserue that trust of ymployment neither lett o r 
placeing them in the seu r all shipps as they are placed be any rule 
to you or any ground to them, to inioye those places of ymploym*, 
otherwise then they shall be found fitt and deserue, and o r further 
order is that you giue espetiall chardge to such as shall be by you 
left there to carrie themselues verie kindlie w th those People, for 
that the Contrarie as we are informed hath beene hurtfull vnto 
vs, & that some of o r mens vnkinde & churlish dealinge toward^ 
them did form r lie make many of those People refraine to deale 
w th vs, & goe to the Hollenders. And o r desier is that such as 
shall be left there doe there best endevo rs to finde out trade at 
Mesopotania 1 in the pt of Bengalla Cheremendall S* Thome or 
any other places fitt for trade. And to take good obseruacon 
what English Comodities as Iron, Leade, Tynn, steele, Clothes, 
kersies, and saies w th their seu r all kindf 5 and Colo rs are there best 
in request & their values : As alsoe what Comodities are there 
to be bought as namelie Pintadoes & such like for the Molloccos 
& likewise Booke Calicuttf and Lawnes called Casa and such 
other thing^ as may serue for England, where the first sorte will 
serue best w th Pearles, stoanes Muske Bezar, and such like w th 
their seu r all prices, wherein we wish o r men to be ymployed, each 
man accordinge to his skill, the omission for seekeing out whereof 
all this while hath retourned to o r greate losse, and to the benefitt 
of the Hollenders whoe haue beene laborious and industrious 
therein, & this inquirie to be made yf it be possible before yo r 
retourne to thend that at yo r retourne to England we may be 
effectuallie adu r ticed of all theis ^ticulars soe far as you may, & of 
all other thingf for o r better direccons in the next voyadge. 

Item for that it is vnfitt & inconvenient that o r trade be 
ympted vnto any but o r gen r all Companie it is 

Not to ymparte the ... .. , 

trade to' any but the exprcslie ordered, & soe the ffacto are to haue 

Company 

46. chardge not to write or aduice any their pticuler 

1 See page 73, note 10. 



26a FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

freindf or others of the prices of any Comodities, either bought or 
sould But onelie in their gen r all Ires to the Gou r no r and Companie. 
Item that you o r Generall at yo r retourne from those ptf for 
TO bring an inven- England doe bringe w th you vnto vs from thence 
I n r r f mon d eys dc yo e u an Inventorie of all o r goodf debtf & moneys w ch 
partes leaue in those vou tnen sna ^ happen to leaue remaineing in any 

47 those ptf puttinge to this o r gen r all Accompte all 
guiftf present^ and gratificacons w cL shall be geven by any furreine 
Prince or Potentate vnto whome we haue now sent Present or 
others. 

And further o r direccon is that yo u o r Generall att yo r comeing 
. , to Bantam doe besidf the tre and present to that 

To guie to the Ad- 

present^if^e"?^ kinge giue vnto the Admirall & such other greate 

48 psonadge theare as o r ffacto shall aduise you to 
haue beene freindlie to them, such present or gratificacon as shall 
be thought fitt, and by their further kinde dealeinge w th you they 
shall deserue. 

And alsoe yf Convenientlie you may we wish that a ffactorie 

or at least some of o r people be appointed to 
mon^ffTt'may beT" recide at Priamon both for their better health and 

saffetie, & for pcuring for vs pepp & other 
Comodities: yf there shall be men and stocke there to ymploie & 
you shall see iuste cause to doe the same 

Item o r direccon is that at yo r retourne from Bantam you doe 

bringe thence for the Companie some small 
fT^Kp&Tr quantitie of the East India Tynn for triall & 

proofe thereof. 
Item Touching the ffacte Comitted by S r Edward Michelborne 1 

though we and the rest of o r Companie knowe o r 
ahoutV'the fflc d tof selues to be mecrelie innocent therein, Yet if by 
bonI?(Tf a need M be) hel " any meanes we or o r goodf should be dampnified 

thereby we wish you soe farr as saffelie you may 
to seeke to that Kinge and Magistrate for redresse and recom- 
pence thereof. The w ch yf you cannot obtaine then o r will is that 
you vse the bcnefitt geuen you in that behalfe, soe farr forth as 
you shall see cause & be free of further danger. 

1 See note, page 134. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 263 

And for that we finde best proffitt by the lardge sorte of Pepp 
both for the pricf that you pay aswell for thone 

To buie of the lard- J ^ J 

gest pepper. as for theother, we pray you at any hand to buie 

soe much of the lardgest sorte as by any meanes 
you can gett, and let the same be put by it selfe into the shipp 
that it be not mingled w th any other. 

Item after the depture of the said Alexander Sharpie and 
Richard Rowles to diu r s Coastf as thone for 
England & thother as we haue by this Comis- 
sion ordered yf the said Richard Rowles shall happen to die 
(w dl god forbidd) then we doe appointe in his place for order- 
ing and effectinge the busines by vs hereby Comitted vnto 
the said Richard Rowles his chardge vnto Richard Reaue ffacto r , 
But neu r thelesse if the said Richard Rowles shall happen to die 
before he shall pte Companie w th the said Alexander Sharpie for 
diu r s place as aforesaid, Then o r expresse will is that Wiftm 
Revett 1 facto 1 be appointed in the place of the said Richard 
Rowles of Leiuetenant Generall in this present voyadge before 
any other. As alsoe by the death of the said Alexander Sharpie 
now o r Generall to succeede his place and chardge in the absence 
of the said Richard Rowles by death or otherwise vntill their 
meeteinge together againe in this voyadge. 

Item now lastlie & w the the first to be remembred we 
Comend vnto you all an espetiall care to haue 
yo r Eyes open to all deuices & practises w ch may 
be wrought against you o r shipps and goodf in eu r y place 
where you come keepinge a continuall watch, whereby you may 
be readie to prevent any miscbeefe intended against you suspect 
all howe freindlie soeu r they seeme to be be redie still and stand 
vpon yo r guarde truste not yo r saffetie to the carelesse attend- 
ance of the Comon Mariners whoe will not loose their present 
pleasures or ease though the losse of yo r Hues o r shipps and good 
depend vpon it. And albeit we haue sett downe eu r y thinge what 
we remember & desier to be done in pticular, Yet yf vpon 
due Consideracon you finde cause to aulter any thinge, w ch we 



1 One of the factors in the Assertion. After the shipwreck, he set out with the 
others for Agra, but died upon the road. 



264 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

heare haue sett downe, haueing w th good aduice resolued there- 
vpon we referr the same to yo T discrecons, for yo r better 
assistance & warie proceedinges therein as alsoe in all other o r 
affaires we appointe Wiftm Revett Richard Reaue and lohn 
lourdan, if you see noe cause to the Contrarie & such others as 
you the principall Comanders shall thinke fitt to Consider and 
Consult w th you the Generall of all thing? needfull, whome we 
wish you to imbrace & vse w th a loueinge respect & freindlie & 
diligentlie to hearken to their Councells puttinge in execucon what 
shall w th good deliberacon be soe agreed vpon : And soe we 
Comend you and yo r endevo to God? prouidence whoe guide 
you w th his feare & defend you from all dangers. Amen. 



Thing? dehVed by the Companie to 
m r Alexander Sharpie Generall in March 1607. Viz. 

This Comission of the Companie vnder 
their scale signed by the Secretarie. 
2. Item 12 Ires from his ma tie : & the English of 
them to Princ? in the Indies. 1 

3. Item a saffe Conduct from his ma tie : vnder the priuie scale for 

passadge of o r men from the Indies ou r land w th a Coppie 
thereof in English. 2 

4. Item a Comission to m r Sharpie Gen r all & a duplicate to 

m T Richard Rowles Leiuetenant Gen r all vnder the greate 
seale of England, the \v ch duplicatt is to remaine in his 
hand? vntill they twoe depte Companie. 3 

5. Item a Coppie of the Priviledg? obtayned by S r lames 

Lancaster at Dachem & Sumatra to the Companie 4 
his obseruacon of tymes meete to be obserued in the 
East Indies 5 And the Discripcon of the Hand? of 
Banda Amboyna Selebes o r Makasser Botton Seran w th 
the wares therein spent and bought & their weight? 

1 See page 231. 4 See page 69. 

8 See page 232. 5 See page 136. 

8 See page 227. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



265 






together w tb c r teine direccons for saileing vpon the 
Coastf in the Indies. 1 

6. A ire howe to deale w th Salbancke according to order of 

Courte the 5th of March i6o7. 2 

7. An order of Courte held the nth of the said monneth of 

March, not to deale in any other mann r but by way of 
honest m r chandize 8 

8. A tre to the ffacto of the 3 voyadge 4 w th a Coppie thereof & of 

theirs form r lie sent the last yeare for better vnderstand- 
inge what is to be ^formed on their pte of the 4 th voyadg 
w th a note of the manner of his priuate trade & howe 
the same is to be registred &c : 

9. An Invoice of all moneys & other thingf now sent : Car- 

racters 5 to write Overland (if need be) & Beames 
weightf & Scales &c. 




Thingf then deliu r ed to m r Richard Rowles 
Leiuetenante gen r all. 

the foresaid Comission of the Companie 
vnder their seale signed by the Secretory 
A Coppie of the foresaid Priuiledgf obtayned 
by S r lames Lancaster at Dachem w th the 
obseruacon of tymes in the Indies & the discripcon 
of Ilandf wares weightf & direccon for saileinge vpon 
the Coaste of the Indies &c : before mencioned. 
3 An other tre to the ffacto rs of the 3 voyadge for the more 
saffetie in deliu r y thereof accordinge to the supscripcon 
w th a note of the mann r of his priuate trade & how the 
same is to be registred &c : The Copies of all thing^ 
before mencioned are form r lie recorded in this Register. 



1 See pages 73-86. 

2 See page 234. 

3 See note, page 234, 



* See page 236. 
5 See page 250. 




266 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

HE some of a Passe 1 to be procured for the East India 
Companie from the Grandsignio r to xl 13 and C *3 
Gou r no of his Citties of Aden and Mocca at the mouth 
of the red sea & to all & eu r y other his Officers Gou r no 
and superio of any his Provinces Citties Townes Seas Rivers & 
Bridge &c : thereabout^ , or ells where in any his Dominions. 

That whereas he and his Predicesso are and haue beene for 
The some of a saffe *^ e space of many yeares in league and amitie 
*' w * h ^ e mi g nt i e kingf of England & the subiectf 
of that kingdome haue longe had and now haue 
free traffique and trade in Marchandizeing in his dominions and 
Countries through the Mediterranean Seas : And whereas some 
of the SubiectfJ of that kingdome (as he is informed [)] haueing 
w th their greate chardge and labo r found out atrade in Theast 
Indies, & heareing of the fame & wealth of some ptf? of his 
Countries in their passadge to the said Indies, are desirous to 
vizitt those placf for thenlardginge of their said trade. And 
Considering how beneficiall the same may be to him & his 
kingdomes, & that such men in soe good an enterprise profitable 
to humane Societie deserue not onelie praise and favo r but alsoe 
aide and helpe soe far as may be lawfullie & convenientlie 
yealded. He hath beene pleased of his Princelie favo r to 
vouchsaife them theis his Ires of saffe Conducte and Comendacon 
Comanding the said 33. and < 13. and all other his said 
Officers &c : not onelie kindlie and loueinglie to enterteine and 
receiue the said Marchauntf subiectfT of England, comeing or 
passinge throughe, or by any of his dominions assistinge and 
releiueinge them w th all thingf needfull for them selues, their men 
and shipps : But alsoe freelie to pmitt them by land or by Sea to 
goe or saile to goe forward, or retourne and as their occasion 
shall requier to remaine in any his Countries Citties or dominions, 
grantinge them such libtie of traffique and priuiledgf as shall be 
reasonable, w tb out giueing or sufferinge any lett hindrance Iniurie 
or molestacon to be offered or done vnto them, & yealdinge vnto 
them such offices of benevolence & humanitie as shall be con- 
venient to be yealded honest men and strangers vndertakeinge 
soe longe and laborious a iourney handlinge their owne affaires 
& behaueing them selues honestlie and peaceablie. 

1 See page 217. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 267 

iFTER 1 o r hartie Comendacons &c : fforaGmuch as we 
haue an intent to buie the shipp at Hull called the 
m r chaunt Royall soe as shee vpon veiwe may be 
found fitting for vs in all respect? aswell in her price 
as goodnes : & vnderstanding that by some yo r affaires, you now 
TO or verie kmein- haue occasion to be at Hull or thereabout? : we 
smvth mrcha"" t haue thought yt good and haue soe concluded to 
send the bearer hereof m r Robert Earle vnto you 
a man skilfull in shippinge to thend that by o r instruccons giuen 
him (a coppie whereof we send you here inclosed) & yo r good 
direccons, a diligent veiwe and inquirie may be taken of her, both 
for her price, goodnes, strength, breadth and fitnes for o r seruice, 
as for o r saffe inioyinge of her &c : Wherefore we pray you to 
make ymployment of the said m r Earle herein, & to giue him yo r 
helping hand for the pformance thereof in the best manner you 
may for the good of the Company. And further we doe requier 
you (yf you w th the advice of the said m r Earle) shall soe finde the 
said shipp in all respect? as aforesaid fitt for o r service to vse the 
best meanes you cann to buie her for thuse of this Companie soe 
as you may haue her deliu r ed here at London w th all thing? now 
belonging vnto her vnder or for the some of seaven hundred 
pound? at the most for the cheeffest man of abilitie and otherwise 
w th whome you are to deale for sale and securitie of her we 
conceiue to be m r Joseph ffeild a man not vnknowne vnto you as 
we vnderstand But yf you cann not bargaine for her vnder or at 
that price at the most then we pray you to c r tifie vs of the 
.pticulars thereof by the said m r Earle or by some more speedie 

1 Immediately after the ships of the Fourth Voyage had been despatched, prepara- 
tions were made for the equipment of a Fifth. The Merchant Royal of Hull was 
mentioned at a court held on 2and March, 1607/8, as a suitable vessel, and three 
members of the Company, including Mr. Humphrey Smyth, were requested to make 
the necessary enquiries. On the igth April, it was agreed that Robert Earle should 
be sent to Hull to view the ship, and to " deale therein accordinge to o r instruccons 
" giuen him & as he shall be directed by m r Humfrey Smyth vnto whome we purpose 
" to direct o r Ires to that effect : as by o r Register (of such thinges) at lardge appereth." 
On the I4th June, i5/. was voted to Mr. Earle for "his paines & chardges " in going 
to Hull, but nothing is said as to the result of his mission. The ship was not bought, 
but this may have been due to the resolution come to that the Fifth Voyage should 
not be sent out by the adventurers in the Fourth, as had been intended, but by the 
adventurers of the Third Voyage. 




268 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Messenger that vpon receipt of yo r Ires we may resolue what to 
doe in the same. And thus not doubting of yo r care and kindnes 
we comitt you to the tuicon of Thalmightie London the 2o th of 
Aprill 1608. 

Yo r loueing freindf the Adventurers of 
theast India Company in the 4 th voyadge. 



The Twenteth of Aprill 1608. 

A remembraunce for m r Robert Earle to be sent to 
Hull about veiwing of the shipp there to be sould called 
the m r chant Royall. 1 

[NPRIMIS you are w th all convenient expedicon to goe for 
Kingston vpon Hull or to Beverley or theareaboutf to 
m r Humfrey Smyth of London m r chaunt at what place 
you may there first finde him & dehVing him theis o r 
ires you are to take and ffollowe what direccons he shall giue you 
in this busines. 

Item yo u comeinge thither and findinge (w th the advice of the 
said m r Smyth) that the said shipp may be for o r seruice,, you are 
to make diligent search and veiwe of her, of what strength she is 
of, what crosse beames, futtick Riders, 2 bottume riders & needfull 
stannders 3 &c : she hath in her: whereby yt may be the better 
conceiued what the cost will be to make her fitt for o r voyadgf . 

Item you are c r teinelie to learne her burthen, her breadth her 
length : how much water she draweth in her ballast, & howe 
much full laden, yf she be any way weakened by the longe lyinge 
not ymployed : her adge, & yf all her tymbers be sounde. 

Item you are to vnderstand & see howe she is fitted w th good 
mast?, sailes, yardf , Cables & other furniture. 

1 See note on the preceding document. 

3 Riders are timbers reaching from the keelson to the orlop-beams, to bind the 
ship and give additional strength. When a rider is lengthened by means of pieces 
batted or scarphed to it, the latter are known as futtock-riders. (Smyth's Sailor's 
Word Book.) 

8 Standards. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 269 

Item you are to make inquirie howe she is Condicioned in her 
saileing & steridge as otherwise : & alsoe what ordinance she 
hath, of weight and length &c : & of all other thingf needfull. 

Item to learne her lowest price, & in that price what ordinance 
mastf sailes yardf Cables & other thingf are to be sould w th her 
and being bought howe she may be brought hither & at whose 
chardge & what good securitie may be had for enioyinge of her, 
& by whome yt will be geven. 

Lastlie you are to make an Inventorie of all the premisses in 
writeinge the better to informe vs at yo r retourne, in what state 
she is, what she hath & what she wanteth & the same being 
pformed you are to retourne by the first meanes you may : But 
yf before yo r comeing thither yt shall fall out that m r Humfrey 
Smyth shall be retourned thence for London then you are to 
followe theis yo r direccons w th out him wherein you are to vse all 
care & expedicon & Retourne. 



JHEAREAS 1 we the Gou r no r and Company of Mar- 
chauntC of London trading into the East Indies Haue 
interteyned and hired Phillipp de Graeffe of the 
precinct of S* Katherines neare to Tower of London 
Manner to goe as principall m r in one of the twoe shipps now 
latelie by vs prepared & sent in o r fourth voyadge 

A Bill of Adventure r . j 1 n , i ", , 

to mr. Groues tor those ptf. And nauc allowed and paied him 

for his ymployment in the said voyadge before his 

this is corrected & 11- n r 7 , 

made as it was depture hence theis seu r all somes following Viz. 

deluded to his \vicff f 

The some of One hundred Twentie and ffyve 
pounds for his prepacon to sea : The some of Twentie poundc 
for fower monnethes Harborrow wagf after the rate of ffyve 

1 " Att the suite of the wieffe of Phillipp de Graeffe for a Bill of Adventure 

" of the gaine of 550 11 accordinge to order the i8 th of November last. Yt was agreed 
" that some fitt Bill w th the advice of m r Deputie be made and deliu r ed her as shee 

"requireth and that yt be noted vpon the same Bill of Adventure, what 

" moneys Graeffe hath allreadie receiued, & howe much over and aboue his ymprest 
"&c: for future memory thereof." (Court Minutes, i/jth June, 1608.) 

See also page 239. 

" Added in another hand. 




27 o FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

poundf p monneth : The some of ffortie shilling^ for Boate hier : 
And further vpon his intreatie haue lent and ymprested vnto him 
the some of Eeighteene poundf ou r & aboue the somes formerlie 
giuen him, the w ch some of Eighteene poundf is onelie to be 
defalked out of such proffitt of Adventure as hereafter is granted 
him. Now knowe yee that we the said Gou r no r & Company, for 
further allowance & recompence of the good service travell and 
paines w ch he the said Phillipp de Graeffe faithfullie pmyseth to to 
his best endeuo r9 to pforme in the said voyadge both outward^ & 
homewardf for the good of the said Company Doe by theis 
present^* for vs & o r Successo rs promyse and agree to giue and 
allowe vnto him the said Phillipp de Graeffe his Execute 
Administrate 1 " 8 or Assignes, vpon the gaine & proffitt w ch god shall 
send by the retourne of the same voyadge (the principall 
Adventure thereof, & all chardge of the voyadge goodf & 
m r chandizes of what kinde soeu r both by land or water first 
borne & deducted [)] Soe much gaine as ffyve hundred and fyftie 
poundf will produce that is to saie such rate & pffitt as yf he had 
beene an Adventurer of the some of ffyve hundred and ffyftie 
poundf , & as yf he had put in soe much readie money in stocke 
in the said voyadge. The w ch rate and proporcon of proffitt is to 
be paid vnto him the said Phillip de Graeff his Execute 1 " 3 Ad 3 or 
Assignes in such manner and forme as the gaine and proffitt of 
the said voyadge shall be paid to all other the Adventurers 
gen r allie, vpon the some of ffyue hundred and ffyftie pound C by 
them adventured. 

But if he happen to die before the retourne of the said shipps 
from the said East Indies, or those other placf whither they 
they are directed, hauinge liued & Contynued in the said voiadge 
vntill the shipps, or shipp wherein he shall serue shall arriue & 
come to such porte in those part, at w ch it shalbe founde fitt to 
lade the same : Then the said gaine pporcioned of the said rate of 
55o u aduenture to be paid to his Execute 1 ' 3 Ad s or Assignes, as it 
should haue been paid vnto him, if he had retourned w th the said 
shipps. Prouided alwaies that if [he] decease before the shipps 
shall arriue to such porte in those ptf at w ch they are to take in 
their ladinge. That then the moneys imprested & deliu r ed him 
before his goinge to Sea shalbe vnto him, in full recompence of his 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 271 

entertainTm* formerlie agreed vppon for the voiadge. And vppon 
theis Condicons & puiso before mencoed we the Gou r no r & Com- 
panie vnder o r Comon Seale, haue giuen vnto the said Phillip de 
Graeff this pnte Bill of Contract & aduenture dated the 2O th day 
of lune 1608 And in the yeare of the reigne of o r sou r eigne lord 
lames Kinge of England ffrance & Ireland the Sixt & of Scot- 
land the one & fforteth. 




Wiftm lennynge Citizen and of London 

one of the Adventurers and one of the Brethren of the 
Company of Marchauntf of London trading into the 
East Indies Hath not onelie Adventured the some of 
ioo u vnder me Wiftm Bonham Citizen and Vintener of London 
& alsoe one of the Adventurers & one of the said 

The Bill of an Ad- ~ f , , . -.,,1-1-^ 

uenturer of s $ou, in Company of m r chantf tradmge into the East 

the 4* 11 voiadge, to,....-, - - - 

an Adventurer vnder Indies in their fourth voyadge for those ptf : But 
hath likewyse trulie paid the said some of ioo u to 
me the said William Bonham as appeth by the register of the said 
Company the 4th of March iGoy. 1 Now knowe yee that I the 
said Wiftm Bonham doe by theis pntf pmyse and agree to & w th 
the said Wiftm lennyngf That I the said Wiftm Bonham my 
Executo 13 & Administrate 13 shall & will vpon the retourne of the 
shipps or either of them sett out by the said Company in their 
said 4th voyadge or w th in Convenient tyme after their said 
retourne in the same deliu r vnto the said Wiftm lennyngc his 
Executo rs Administrate 1 " 3 or Assignes a true and iust accompt and 
paym* of the said some of ioo u soe by him adventured vnder me 
& of the proffitt & benefitt w cl1 god shall send thereof ratablelie 
and accordinge to the gen r all distribucon proporcon and allotm* 
w clx shall be allotted disposed and geven to me the said Wiftm 
Bonham & to all other the seu r all Adventurers of 55O U in the said 
fourth voyadge proporcionallie to each mans seu r all Adventure. 
In witnes whereof I haue herevnto sett my hand and scale the 
4th day of lulie 1608. And in the Yeare of the Reign of &c : 

1 i.e. the Court Minutes of that date. 




FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

HIS Bill or writeinge witnesseth That whereas I Henrie 
Bridgman Citizen and Leathersellep of London, Haiie 
vndertaken to adventure as one of the Brethren & 
Adventurers of the Company of Marchauntf tradinge 
to the East Indies the some of 6oo u of lawfull money of England 
The BUI of Adven- m tn i s their pnte intended expedicon or fourth 
u e rth f voyage " voyadge to the East Indies in the good shipps 
hi n m Ad the lU Biir c on called the Assencon & the Vnion. And whereas 
SfcFiX beLg'S Nicholas Skynner Citizen and Cutlar of London, 
& alsoe one of the Brethren of the said Company 
of Marchaunte trading to the said East Indies, hath alreadie 
trulie paid to me the said Henry Bridgman the some of 150" of 
like lawfull money of England being one 4 th parte of the said some 
or stocke before mencioned, w ch said some he the said Nicholas 
Skinner is Contented to Adventure vnder me in the said fourth 
voyadge in such manner as all other Vnderadventurers haue done. 
Knowe ye therefore That I the said Henrie Bridgman for me my 
Execute and Administrate" & eu r y of vs doe couenant promyse 
and graunte to and w th the said Nicholas Skinner his Execii & 
Administr & eu r y of them by theis pntf That yt shall and may be 
lawfull to and for the said Nicholas Skynner his Execu Administr 
& Ass s & eu r y of them vpon the retourne of the ships or either of 
them sett out in this said fourth Voyadge or w th in Convenient 
tyme after their said retourne in the same to haue receiue & 
enioye to his and their propp vse & behoofe out of my said stocke 
& adventure of 6oo u the some of One hundred and ffyftie by him 
the said Nicholas Skynner adventured vnder me in the said fourth 
voyadge as aforesaid together w th all such benefitt proffitt encrease 
and gaine as god shall send thereof ratablie from tyme to tyme 
according to the gen r all distribucon proporcon and allotm* w ch 
shall be allotted disposed and giuen to me the said Henry 
Bridgman & all other the Aduenturers in the said voiadge, 
proportionate to eache mans seu r all Aduenture. And furder that 
I the said Henrie Bridgman my execu & Ads & eu r y of vs shall 
and will at all tymes & from tyme to tyme hereafter vpon 
reasonable request to vs or any of vs made by the said Nicholas 

1 i.e. the preceding document. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 773 

Skynner his Execute" Admi or Ass 8 make him the said Nicholas 
Skynner his Execu & AdmT acquainted, w th all & eu r y the proceed- 
ingC in the said voyadge, w ch shall Concerne the takeing out & 
receiueing of the said some of I5O U w th the proffittf thereof as 
amplie as shall any way come to the knowledge of me the said 
Henrie Bridgman my Execute" and Ads w th out fraude or guile. 
In witnes whereof I haue &c. 




IHEAREAS 1 & IS Citizen and &c one of the 

Adventurers and one of the Brethren of the Companie 
of Marchauntf of London tradinge into the East 
Indies hath not onelie sett downe for his Adventure 
w tb the said Company to the some of 55o u in their 4 th voyadge to 
A em of Adventure ^ e East Indies by the Cape Bono, spei : in the 
for the 4 * voyadge g OO( j s hipp S called the Assencon & the Vnion 
But hath alsoe trulie paied the said some of 55o n for his Adven- 
ture to Richard Atkinson Casheare to the said Adventurers in the 
4 th voyadge. We therefore the" Gou'no* and Company doe by 
this o r present Bill of Adventure promyse and agree to and w* k 
the said & 13. That we the said Gou r no r and Comp : and o r 
Successo shall and will vpon the retourne of the ships called the 
Assencon & Vnion or either of them sett out by vs in this present 
fourth voyadge or w th in Convenient tyme after their said retourne 

in the same deliu r vnto the said E 33 his Execu Administ: 

or Assignes atrue and iust Accompt and paym* of such stocke 
benefitt and proffitt of stocke as god shall send vpon the said 
voyadge according to the gen r all distribucon pporcon and allotm* 
w** shall be allotted disposed and given to all & eu r y the seu r all 
Adventurers except & alwaies reserued out of the said some or 
stocke before mencioned for and to thuse of the right owners of 
the same all such somes w* 11 shall in due tyme iustlie appeare to 

1 " Was red a Bill of Adventure, to be made & given vnder the Companies scale 
" to all & eu r y the principall Adventurers in the 4** voyadge to theast Indies & ordered 
" to be engrossed & delinked accordinglie." (Court Minutes, 22nd Nov., 1608.) 

T 




274 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

the said Company to be adventured vnder the said & $3 

by any vnderadventurer in the said fourth voyadge togither w th all 
the promttf & benefittf thereof w th out fraude or guile. In wit- 
nes whereof &c : 



IHEAREAS 1 I JB. 2 citizen and grocer of London one of 
the Adventurers & one of the Brethren of the Com- 
pany of Marchauntf of London trading into the East 
Indies hath not onelie sett downe for his Adventure 
w th the said Company the some of 150 poundf in their third 
voyadge to the East Indies by the Cape Bono, 

The Bill of Adven- -. . , 

ture to the third spei : But hath alsoc trulie paid the said some 
of 150" for his Adventure to Thomas ffarrington 
Threr of the said Company. We therefore the Gou r no r & 
Company doe by this o r pnte Bill of Adventure pmyse and 
agree to and w th the said $ ftt. That we the said Gou r no r and 
Company & o r Successo" shall and will vpon the retourne of 
the shipps or any of them sett out by vs in this pnte third 
voyadge or w th in Convenient tyme after their said retourne in 
the same deliu r vnto the said $ Jft. his Execu AdminT or Ass s a 
true and iust accompt and paym* of such stocke benefitt and 

1 " It is further ordered That all those w ch haue paid to the Threr of the Company 
" m r Thomas ffarrington all such somes of money as they haue sett downe & adventured 
" in the third voyadge to Theast Indies. Haue now yealded them by the Company 
" vnder their Comon scale a Bill of Adventure for the same. And for the Secretaries 
" more exact doinge thereof, by yealdinge eu r y man his due, m r Stevens the Accompt 
" Keeper is from tyme to tyme to giue him true notice what each man hath soe 
" Adventured, & haue then alreadie paid in the same to or Threr m r Thomas ffarrington 
" as aforesaid." (Court Minutes, i6th Feb., 1607/8.) 

" Att this Courte for the true makeinge of Bills of Adventure, according to what 
" each man hath adventured in the third voyadge to the East Indies yt was ordered 
" that the Bills be made as it was now agreed & that all the said Adventurers, doe 
" deliu r vnto m r ffarrington Threr their acquittances taken of him, for such moneys 
" as they haue paid for settinge forth of the said voyadge to Conferr the same w th his 
" & the Accompt Keeperes Bookes, that therevpon the Bills of Adventure may be made 
" accordinglie, in w ch m r Threr is from tyme to tyme to write before they be sealed 
" theis wordes viz : (Examined to agree w th the accomptes by me Thomas ffarrington 
" Threr) vpon sight whereof, the same are to be sealed by m r Gou r no r w th the Comon 
" scale of the Companie." (Ibid., z6th April, 1608.) 

2 John Moore (see the ensuing list). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 275 

proffitt of stocke as god shall send vpon the said voyadge 
according to the gen r all distribucon proporcon and allotm* w ch 
shall be allotted disposed and giuen to all & eu r y the seu r all 
Adventurers in the said voyadge proporcionally to their seiTall 
Adventures. In witnes whereof we haue herevnto annexed o r 
Comon seale the 26th day of Aprill 1608. And in the yeare of 
the reigne of o r sou r eigne Lord kinge lames of England ffraunce 
and Ireland the Sixt & of Scotland the One and fforteth. 

Examined by me Thomas ffarrington 

Sealed w th the Comon seale of the Companie in the 
of me W m Leighton l Secretarie 
Copia 



JILLS of Adventure as ap^eth on the other side of this 
leaffe geven by the Gou r no r & Company of East India 
Marchauntf to the seuerall Adventurers in their third 
voyadge for those pt w th their seu r all somes, & the 
same vnder written by m r ffarrington as by him examined before 
thensealeinge thereof. The w ch are as ffolloweth viz. To 

Morris Abbott . for . . 200" 

William Adderley . . . 125 

William Allen , . . 100 

To m r \ Z Raphe Allen . 100 

J William Angell . . .125 

Samuell Armitage . . . 400 

William Albony . . . 150 

Henrie Archer . . . TOO 

Paule Banninge for . . .525 

1 William Leighton was Secretary to the Company in 1607, having been elected 
at some previous date not precisely known. The last entry relating to him is in 1609, 
but the loss of the fourth Court Book (1610-14) prevents us from fixing exactly the 
date when he ceased to hold this post. 

2 Probably intended to mark a transfer of shares, the name of the person to whom 
they were transferred being left for after insertion. 

T I 




FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



To m r 



To m r 



lohn 


Banckf 


500 


Rowland 


Backhowse 


IOO 


Humfrey 


Basse 


550 


Richard 


Ball 


125 


Nicholas 


Barnsley 


150 


Robert 


Bateman 


250 


Edward 


Barkham 


400 


Richard 


Barrett 


IOO 


Thomas 


Barbar 


150 


Robert 


Bell 


250 


Wittm 


Berblocke 


320 


George 


Bennett 


850 


Richard 


Beale 


500 


Thomas 


Bostocke 


IOO 


George 


Boles 


400 


William 


.Bond 


350 


Thomas 


Boothby 


300 


Wittm 


;Bonham 


700 


lohn 


Brooke 


150 


Henry 


Bridgman 


315-2* 


Robert 


Brooke 


800 


lohn 


Busbridge 


350 


Raphe 


Busby 


187-10' 


Henry 


Butlar 


IOO 


Robert 


Bucke 


125 


ffrancis 


Bucke 


080 


Richard 


Burrell 


IOO 


William 


Burrell 


200 


Richard 


Bourne 


250 


S r Thomas 


Cambell for 


125 


Lo William 


Cavendish 


500 


William 


Cater 


750 


Nicholas 


Cage 


2OO 


lohn 


Casson 


300 


lohn 


Coachman 


IOO 


George 


Chamberlaine Executor to " 


[ 2OO 


Robert 


Chamberlaine . . . J 




Richard 


Chamblaine 


20O 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



lohn 


Chamberlaine 


Execute 1 I2 - 


Androe 


Chamberlaine 


.J 


Richard 


Champion 


. 450 


Robert 


Chilcott 


- 450 


xpofer 


Cletherowe 


. 200 


lohn 


Clinche 


125 


William 


Gockaine 


., 1000 


lohn 


Combe 


, 250 


Robert 


Cocke 


, 250 


Richard 


Cocke 


. 200 


Edward 


Croashawe 


. 125 


Roger 


Gotten 


. 125 


Wittm 


Cotton 


. 300 


their 2 Bills deliu r ed 


to Allen Gotten 


their Executo r . 


Elizabeth 1 


Coles 


150 


lames 


Collimore 


. 125 


lohn 


Cornelius 


. 125 


George 


Chandler 


. 200 


Nicholas 


Crispe 


. 300 


Ellis 


Crispe 


. IOO 


Thomas 


Carpenter 


. IOO 


Roger 


Clarke 


. 500 


Wittm 


Doggett for 


v IOO 


Richard 


Deane 


. 650 


Roger 


Die 


. 300 


George 


Dorrington 


. IOO 


Robert 


Ducie 


.. . 125 


lames 


Duncken 


. 200 


lohn 


Eldred for 


- 550 


lohn 


Ellacott 


. IOO 


ffrancis 


Evington 


. 300 



Nicholas 



ffarrar for 



IOO 



1 The name "George" has been crossed out and "Elizabeth" substituted, 
doubtless as that of his widow and executrix. Mrs. Coles subsequently married Sir 
Robert Leigh, who was made free of the Company on a8th July, 1609 (Court Mitmtes), 



2 7 8 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



Erasmus 


ffarrar 


Thomas 
William 


ffarrington 
fferrers 


lohn 
lohn 


Hollaway 1 
ffletcher 


Randall 
Wittm & Raph 


Hopkins 2 
ffreeman 


Charles 


Glascocke for 


Anthonie 


Gibson 


Robert 


Goare 


Raphe 
Roger 
Richard 


Goare 
Godsalue 
Gossen 


William 


Greenwell 


lohn 


Greenwood 


Reynold 
lohn 


Greene 
Gardiner 


S r Robert 
Raphe 
Edward 


Hampson for 
Hamo* 
Harrison 


lohn 


Hawkins 


Simon 


Harvie 


Raphe 
William 


Harrison 
Harrison 


Humfrey 
Hugh 
Roger 
William 


Hanford 
Hamersley 
Heminge 
Hawkins 


Richard 


Hearne 


S r Thomas 


Heies 


Richard 
lohn 


Heyder 
Highlord 



100 

300 

300 

250 

150 
125 

500 

TOO 
150 
250 
250 
20O 
250 

20O 
350 
200 

100 
625 

350 
26O 
500 

275 
500 

250 
600 
100 
2OO 
150 
250 
200 
4OO 



1 In place of "William ffysher," deleted. William Fisher's adventure was "set 
over " to John Holloway on the 3ist Oct., 1608. 

a Replacing " Alphonsus ffowle," the original owner of the share. The date of 
the transfer was 26th Dec., 1608 (Court Minutes). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



279 



S r Leonard 
Andrew 
Thomas 


Holliday 
Holdipp 
Henshawe 


wiftm 


Hinde 


Thomas 


Horton for 


lohn 
George 
Bartholomew 


Hodgshon 
Holman 
Holland 


Stephen 
Richard 


Hodgshon 
Humble 


Robert 


Harvie 


William 
Robert 


lennyngf for 
lohnson 


Richard 


Ironside 


Thomas 


luxon 


Robert 
William 


Key for 

Kellett 


Brian 


Kinaston 


leofferey 


Kerbie 


Simon 


Lawrence for 


Nicholas 


Leate 


Edward 
Nicholas 
Thomas 


Leaueinge 
Lynge 
Lidall 


Edward 


Lutterford 


Mawrice 


Luellen 


Alderman 


Lemon 


lohn 


Merricke for 


Wiftm 


Millett 


William 
Robert 


Meggf: 
Middleton 


Robert 
Humfrey 
lohn 


Mildmay 
Milward 
Morris 



400 

20O 

125 
200 

350 
2OO 

187.10' 
100 

150 

600 . 

125 

187.10" 

500 

375 



250 

IOO 

125 

300 

125 

2OO 
IOO 

125 
500 
IOO 

350 

IOO 

300 
150 
250 
250 
250 

IOO 



FfRST LETTER BOOK OF 



lohn 


Moore 


150 


Richard 


Maplesden 


. 200 


lohn 


Newman for 


I2 5 


Edmond 


Nicholson 


. 200 


Thomas 


Nelson 


125 


xpofer 


Nicholls 


. 300 


Robert 


Offley for 


50 


Richard 


Osmotherley , 


. IOO 


Roger 


Owfeild 


. 15 


lohn 


Polhill for 


. 30 


Giles 


Paslowe 


. 250 


William 


Palmer 


. 


William 


Palmer leadenhall 1 . 


350 


Robert 


Pennington 


. 300 


Richard 


Pearce 


125 


Richard 


PointeH 


. 150 


Henry 


Polsteed 


. 300 


Robert 


Palmer 


. 


Richard 


Piott 


. 185 


William 


Preistley 


175 


Wiihn 


Pavrer 


. 140 


Peter 


Palmer 


. 150 



William 

S r Wittm 

Henry 

Humfrey 

Robert 

Henry 

Robert 
Edmond 



Quarles 

Romeny for 
Robinson 
Robinson 
Robinson 
Robinson gent . 

Sandie for 
Scott 



IOO 

650" 

550 
400 

425 
500 

600 

200 



1 Added by another band, no doubt as a distinguishing mark. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



281 



Thomas 


Shipton 


lohn 


Sherington 


Augustine 


Skinner 


S r Thomas 


Smyth 


Humfrey 


Smyth 


George 


Smythes , 


Thomas 


Symondf 


S r lohn 


Spencer 


Richard 


Staper 


Mathew 


Stocker 


Thomas 


Southwicke 


lohn 


Stokeley 


Oliver 


Stile 


Humfrey 


Stile 


Nicholas 


Skynner 


Richard 


Stratford 


Richard for 
Anthony 


j Stratford 


Thomas 


Stiles 


ffrancis 


Taylo r for 


Richard 


Tailbie 


Thomas 


Trotter 


Robert 


Waldoe for 


S r lohn 


Wattf 


lohn 


Wattf 


Wittm 


Wastell 


George 


Walker 


Humfrey 


Walcoate 


Thomas 


Westway 


Leonard 


White 


Thomas 


White 


Wittm 


Willaston 


lohn 


Wolstenholme . 


Richard 


Wiseman 



125 

2OO 
IOO 
700 
300 
40O 
250 
750 



400 
400 
150 
300 
150 
300 

350 
150 
300 

250 
125 
150 

IOO 

250 

IOO 

125 

IOO 
20O 
300 
125 
250 
200 
IOO 
2OO 



205 




2*2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

i 

(FTER my harty Comendacons, Whereas the Mar- 
chantes tradinge to the East Indies, by his Ma^ 
warraunt vnder the greate Scale of England beareinge 
date the Eight daye of february : In the v th yeare of his 
highnes raigne had licence to carry foorth : 20000" : sterlinge of 
The io: xhrers forreine Coyne, and havinge as yett transported 
mo7s an or to tran S por: onely : I4ooo u : Theis are to will and require yo u 
of ^oooii^formriS to suffer them to transporte the said somme in a 
p r a a n n y ed by the patent" Shippe called the Expedicon, accordinge to his 
Ma*e pleasure, signified in the said letters pattentf : 
And for so doinge this by vertue thereof shalbe yo r warrant : from 
Whitehall : the xj th of Aprill : 1609 : 

Yo r Lovinge freind 

R. SALISBURY 

To my very lovinge freindes the 
officers of his Ma 1 ^ Customes 
outwardf in the Port of Lon- 
don, and to eu r y of them to 
whome it may apperteine 



|AMES 2 by the grace of God kinge of England Scotland 
ffraunce and Ireland defender of the faith &c : To o r 
trustie and welbeloued David Middleton whereas diu r s 
of o r loueinge Subiectf at their owne Adventures, 
Costf and chardgf , aswell for the honor of this o r Realme of 
England, as for the increase & advancem* of trade 
matfes comLslon to and m r chandize, w th in the same, Haue form r lie 

Capt: David Middle- f . _ . . ,, 

ton y e nth of Apriii. sett forth fower voyadgf to the East Indies, w th 
c r teine shipps and Pinnaces by way of m r chan- 
dizinge, by w ch shipps and Pinnasses they haueinge discou r ed and 
begunn to settle a trade in some parte of the said East Indies & 
their shipps beinge retourned in three of their former voyadgf 
from thence, laden w th sundrie m r chandize brought from 

1 A mistake for zo.ooo 11 . The patent referred to will be found on page 224. 
3 The Royal Commission for the Fifth Voyage (see note, page 115). There is a 
minute of this commission among the Domestic State Papers in the Record Office. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 283 

those ptf, They the said Marchauntf intendinge to freequent 
those Countries of the East Indies by contynueinge the trade 
alreadie discou r ed and begun. And indevoringe further discou r y 
of trade of those partf for the more ample vent of the natiue 
Comodities of o r kingdomes And retourneing from the placf of 
their discou r y such necessarie comodities as shallbe of spetiall vse 
& benefitt both to Vs and o r Subiectf & haue now prepared a 
c r teine shipp to the said East Indies: AND WHEAREAS the 
said Marchauntf haue chosen yo u the said David Middleton, to be 
principall Gou r no r or Generall of all the Marchauntf, Mariners 
and other o r Subiectf w ch are or shall be shipped in the said Shipp, 
we gratiouslie favoringe their intended voyadge and approueinge 
and allowinge of their choise of you to the same gou'nm 1 , beinge 
desierous to furnish yo u w th all fitt and Convenient power and 
authoritie to rule and gou r ne all & eu r y our Subiectf imployed in 
this voyadge, by a due obedience to be by them yealded Vnto you, 
in the obserueinge and executeinge of all such good orders & 
Constitucons as yo u shall thinke Convenient to ordeine and 
appointe for the furtherance of the said voyadge to the honor of Vs 
and o r kingdomes, and the advancem* of the said trade, DOE 
hereby straightlie chardge and Comand all & eu r y pson and 
psonns imployed vsed or shipped in this Voyadge in the said Shipp, 
to giue all due obedience and respect Vnto yo u during the said 
Voyadge & to beare themselues one towardf another in all good 
order and quietnes for avoieding any occasion that might breede 
mutiny quarrells or dissencon amongst them to the hindrance of 
the good successe w ch is to be hoped for by Godf providence of 
the said intended Voyadge AND in default of such dutie and 
obedience to be pformed toward^ you for the correccon and 
quenchinge of all such mutiny quarrells or dissencon that shall or 
may be moved by the disorder evell disposicon or pversnes of any 
the said psonns, WEE DOE hereby authorize you the said David 
Middleton duringe the said Voyadge or during soe longe tyme as 
yo u shall lyue in the said Voyadge to chastice correct and ponish 
all offenders & transgressors in that behalfe accord inge to the qual- 
litie of their offenses w th such punnishm^ as are comonlie vsed in 
all Armies at Sea, when they are not Capitall And for Capitall 
offences, as wilfull murther w ch is hatefull in the sight of God, or 
mutinie w ch is an offence that may tende to the ou r throwe of the 



284 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

said Voyadge, the same being trulie and iustlie proved against any 
of the pson or psons aforesaid, WE DOE hereby giue vnto yo u 
the said David Middleton duringe all the tyme of the said 
voyadge, or during soe longe tyme as yo u shall lyve in the said 
Voyadge full power & authoritie to vse and putt in execucon o r 
Lawe called Martiall La we in that behalfe : A ND THEIS o r 
tres shalbe vnto you sufficient warrant and dischardge for the 
doinge and executinge of all & singuler the premisses: AND 
forasmuch as att this present tyme we are in amitie . w th all 
Christian Princes & are vnwillinge that any our Subiecte should 
giue occasion of breach or hindrance of that league or amitie w ch 
we hould w th any o r Confederate freinde or Alleys. And because 
we are not ignorant of the emulacon & envy that doth accompany 
the discou r y of Countries and trade, & of the quarrells and Con- 
tencons w ch doe many tymes fall out betweene the subiecte of 
diu r s Princes, that meete the one w th theother in forraine & farr 
remote Countries in the Course & psecutinge of their discou r yes, 
& being desierous that our subiecte should forbeare to moue or 
beginn any quarrell or Contencon (Vppon the Subiecte of our 
Confederate freinde or Allies [)], either in their proceedinge or 
retourne vpon or from any of their Voyadge, WE THERFORE 
doe hereby straightlie chardge and Comand you the said David 
Middleton & all other vnder yo r go^nm* that neither in yo r 
voyadge outwarde or homewardf or in any Country, Island, 
Porte, or place where yo u shall abide or come duringe the tyme 
of yo r beinge abroad out of o r kingdomes or dominions where you 
meete w th any the Subiecte of the kinge of Spaigne or of any 
other o r Confederate ffreinde or Allies, or of any other Nacon or 
people their Shipps Vessells Goode or m r chandize yo u doe not 
attempt or goe aboute to sett vpon take or supprise their psonns 
Ships Vessells goode or m r chandizes or offer any iniury or 
discourtesie vnto them vnlesse yo u shall be by them first there- 
Vnto iustlie provoked, or driuen either in the iust defence of yo r 
owne psonns yo r Shipps Vessells Goode or m r chandizes either by 
any other their disturbance or hindrance whatsoeu r in yo r quiett 
course of trade either for recompence or recou r y of the psonns 
goode r m r chandize of any o r Subiecte that are alreadie in or 
neare the East Indies or otherwyse for any iust cause of yo r 
defence, as yo u will awnsweare the contrary at yo r vttermost prills. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 285 

AND wheareas we are informed that the said David Middleton 
hath sould in the East Indies, Three small peecf of cast Iron 
Ordinance contrary to the Lawes of this o r Realme, for that the 
same was done vpon necessitie, & for the good of the publique 
service, & the releefe of such as were distressed in that voyadge. 
WE are gratiouslie pleased to dispence w th him in that behalfe : 
And doe by theis present^ pardon and remitt the said offence, 
and dischardge him the said David Middleton of and from all 
such penalties as by o r said Lawes may be inflicted vpon him for 
sellinge of the said Ordinance w th out o r licence first had and 
obteyned in that behalfe, Any Lawe statute or restrainte to the 
contrary in any wyse notw th standinge. In wittnes whereof we 
haue caused theis o r ires to be made Pattentf : Witnes o r selfe at 
Westm the n th day of Aprill in the Seaventh yeare of o r Raigne of 
England ffraunce an$ Ireland, & of Scotland the Twoe and fforteth. 

breve de private sigillo : 

Coppin. 



[FTER 1 o r hartie Comendacons &c Yo r letters of the 
xvi th of lanuary 1607 2 by Cornelius Matalife together 
w th a briefe of the state of o r busines in yo r handlinge 
we haue receiued : As alsoe yo r last of the xv th of 
lulie 3 by Captaine David Middleton in the Consent: w ch shipp 
arriued here in lanuary last (thankf be to god) in 

A Coppie of the Ires J ^ 

sent to the ffacto" at good saffetic, laden w th Cloues to o r verv erood 

Bantam in thexpe- ' J ' 

dkon by capt: David contenting, for w ch we haue had a good price & 

Middleton. . ,. . _ 

present dispatch, Soe as we haue none remaine- 
inge to sell : By him we alsoe receiued Henry Sydalls lournall, 
wherein appeared what good? yo u sent in the said Shipp to the 
Molluccoes, what thereof was sould, what retorned to yo u , & of 
Captaine Middletons whole proceeding^ in the buyinge of the 
said Cloues : Alsoe one other lournall of yo r accomptf touchinge 

1 At a Court held i3th April, 1609, the Company's letters to be sent to their 
factors at Bantam in this voyage were " openlie read Considered and allowed of." 

2 Not now extant. They are referred to as received in the Court Minutes of igth 
September, 1608. 

3 Read to the Court on i6th and i8th January, 1608/9, but now missing from the 
records. 







286 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

o r busines in yo r handlinge since the same was deliu T ed over to 
yo u by Edmund Scott, vntill the first of lulie last, and thereby 
rest satisfied w th yo r due pceedingf in accomptf, albeit as yett we 
haue not examined the same : By yo r ires we alsoe pceiue that 
yo u borrowed 3000 Royalls of the Dutch Marchauntf to satisfie 
soe much taken vp of the Captaine and Company of the said 
shipp to supplie o r wantf , for the ladinge of the said Cloues w ch 
we hope vpon the arriuall of the Dragon and Hector, or by some 
other meanes, yo u haue dulie repaid w th all thankfullnes, assureinge 
them further That we will hould their said kindnes in remem- 
braunce, and be readie to requite the same whensoeu r occasion 
shalbe offred : We are very sorry that there was noe better 
dispatch found for o r Cloth at the Molluccoes, consideringe the 
same is much ympaired by the longe lieinge as yo 11 advertice vs, 
But we hope that the Dragon and the Hector arriued w tb you 
shortlie after, And that by them the same will be vented, either 
at Banda or the Molluccos w ch God graunte we may heare : 
Moreou r we trust that yo u haue vsed diligence to putt of all other 
the remaine of o r goodf at Bantam, recouered o r debtf there, and 
ymployed the proceede thereof, accordinge to o r tres by the said 
twoe shipps 1 If not we pray yo u to hasten the same. 

That thaccompt of that busines may be ballanced & to 
the AC- vm ply what yo u haue remaineinge [(]not in- 
c: uested into pepp) in Rawe silke of China called 

Lamkin, like vnto that sample \v ch lohn Saris sent vnto o r Gou r no r 
S r Tho : Smyth : But take heed yo u buy not of the silke that is 
crosse reeled, & called canton for that sorte is not here vendible. 2 

The silke called Lawkin, is here well requested Therefore 
we pray yo u vse your best endevors to putt of 

silke called Lawkin .. - , , - . _ ... . 

o r enghsh Cloth for that Comoditie, whereto as 
it seemeth by Rofet Brownes tres the Chineses were willinge & 
desierous, if yo u had beene furnished w th any w ch giueth vs good 
hope that those people, will fall to weare o r Cloth, Soe as we 
shall finde good vent for the same hereafter, & haue better 

1 See page 147. 

3 " Item, in the Moneths of February and March, heere [Bantam] commeth three 

" or foure lunckes from China, very richly laden with Silkes raw and wrought 

" viz., Raw-silke of Lamhing [Nanking ?], which is the best, an hundred and 
41 ninetie Rialls the Peecull : Raw-silke of Canton, which is courser, eightie Rials the 
" Peecull : " (Saris's notes printed in Purchas, Lib. IIII., ch. 2.) 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 287 

meanes to maintaine an ampler trade there, ffor the better 
procureinge whereof, we haue now and will heerafter, send such 
Cloth as shall be true, both in substaunce and Couller, and soe 
yo u may assure them Moreou r we Vnderstand by m r Brownes 
letter that a trade may be had to Siquedana, 1 for Diamond^ 
whereof we would be glad to tast, and doe approue of his 
diligence in that and other adv'tisem*^ . 

We hope that the Dragon and Hector arriued w th you in 
Diamondcs Bezar Convenient tyme, and that yo u haue pceeded, to 
stones &c: buy some Diamondf, Bezar stones, Muske & 

other Comodities (whereof hitherto we haue had none) according 
to o 1 ' Comission, and Ires sent by o r Generall m r W m : Keelinge, 
for w ch purpose we sent m r Marlowe a Jeweller to goe to such 
placf for the buyinge thereof, as yo u should direct him : And yf 
neither m r Keelinge, nor m r Sharpie, haue entred into the trade 
of Cambaio, Surat or some other place of the maine, Then we 
would haue yo u to informe yo r selues howe strangers are inter- 
tayned at Suratt & Cambaio : And beinge imbouldenned by 
their aduise we wish yo u to appointe twoe of o r ffactors such as 
yo u shall thinke fitt to goe passengers in some lunckf or other 
shippinge of that Country to Surat & Cambaia w th such stocke 
as yo u thinke good, to beare chardgf to and againe to buy such 
Comodities as they shall finde there as Indico, 
of Laher, 2 here worth viij 8 the pounde Serchis^ 
and the best Belondri 4 worth v s the pounde the Courser sorte 

1 Sukadana, on the west coast of Borneo. 2 Lahore. 

3 Vansleb's " Indigo named Serquis," i.e. of Sarkhej, 5 miles S.W. from 
Ahmedabad. Shirkhist is the bazaar name for every kind of Manna imported into 
India; and is the original Persian name for " Khorassan Manna." 

4 Vansleb's " Indigo of Balludri " i.e. Valabhi [BvavTtiov of Ptolemy, viii. i, 7], 
commonly written Ballabi, now an obscure village about 20 miles N.W. from 
Bhavanagar, but formerly the seat of the famous Valabhi kings, who, in succession to 
the mysterious Guptas, ruled over Kathiawar A.D. 318 to 790. The Arab writers of 
the 9th century name the place Balhara, a dialectic corruption of bara-rai, and signifying 
(the City of) "the Great (Valabhi) King." See E. Thomas in Numismata Orientalia, 
Vol. iii., 1882. But for its close association with " Serchis " I should have identified 
"Belondri" here not with Ballabi, but with Vansleb's " Mirabolans surnamed 
Balludri" ; i.e. bahira [Sanskrit and Hindi], berda [Mahrati], bahadrha [Telugu], beleyluj 
[Arabic], beleyhh [Persian] , the dry astringent fruit, with its kernel, of Terminated 
Bellerica, the " Belleric Myrobalan," used in dyeing. The " Chebulic Myrobalan," 
used in the same way, is the fruit of T. Chebula. Neither of these was the 

os , or" unguent-nut," of the ancients, which is usually identified with the 



288 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

will not requite the chardgC and such other Comodities as they 
shall finde theare : Alsoe we would haue yo u procure the best 
favor yo u can w th the Gou r no r and other principall men of each 
place, yo u come to, whereby yo u may be able to enforme vs what 
hope we may haue of trade heereafter to such placf , and yo u 
learne what Comodities of o, kinde, sorte, & Cullo will vent 
there, as namelie what Clothes, karsies ppetuanoes or other 
woollen Comodities & what Cullo r9 are in best and worse request 
leade, Tynn, Iron, steele, muskettf, Calliuers, 1 Daggf, 2 sword- 
bladf , headpeecf , &c : and alsoe what Comodities they finde 
there fitt to serue for the Molluccos or other easterne ptf , or to 
bringe home for England w th such other informacons as experi- 
ence there shall enable yo u w th : Alsoe to send them to any other 
Citties or places of cheefest trade in those partf, & there to 
learne the matters before mentioned, and not to lie still at 
Bantam as yf yo u were tyed and bound to that Towne onelie. 
we haue sent in this Ship a younge man one 

Thomas Emmesworth , ^ 

Thomas Emmesworth** a man of good reputacon, 
and soe we wish yo u to accompt of him, whoe hath beene brought 
vp some tyme in Turkey and hath verie good skill in Indico, of 
all sortf of silke, & other Comodities vsuallie bought in Turkey, 
whose advise therein we wish yo u to followe Alsoe we haue sent 
in this Shipp three other servauntf, whoe albeit they haue place 
in the shipp : (Viz) Richard Wooddis 4 pursar, Sophony Cosuke 5 
pursers :mate, & Edward Nettles 6 Steward, yett we haue inter- 
seeds of Moringa pterygosferma ; but the acid fruit of Phyllanthus Emblica, used in 
India as a pickle, was their pvpo(Ba\avos tftirXtT^ [cp. Sanskrit amlika, andamrita, and 
Hindi aonla.]. 

1 A kind of gun or musket. 2 Pistols. 3 Died at Bantam in 1610. 

4 Left by Middleton at Bantam in 1610 as " chief in the house." 

5 Sophony (Sophonias) Cozuke (the Kazak, i.e. as he is also styled in the Court 
Minutes, "the Russe"), entered the Company's service, perhaps under the patronage 
of Sir Thomas Smyth, in March', 1609, on an engagement to stay in the Indies seven 
years. In 1613 he established a factory at Sukadana, in Borneo, and in the following 
year attempted to do the same at Landak. Two years later, he took an active part 
in an expedition sent to establish a factory at Banda, in the Moluccas, but failed to 
effect his immediate purpose, owing to the opposition of the Dutch. In Oct., 1616, 
he sailed again, with Capt. Courthop, to make a fresh attempt, and this time the 
opposing parties came to actual blows. The Swan was assailed by a Dutch vessel 
and captured after a severe fight, in the course of which Sophony was "beaten in 
pieces with a great shot " (Jan., 1617). 

' Died at Bantam in 1610. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 289 

teyned them to serue vs vij yeares, there w th you, & would haue 
them ymployed in o r busines & such other psonns, as yo u shall 
thinke fitt sent backe in the shipp in their plac . ffurther we 
pray yo u to Consider w th your selues & thereof w th the next, 
advise vs, if it be not more convenient to procure Cloues, Nut- 
spices from Banda me gg? mace, Synamon, Camfere, Benianyn, 
S 1 redd & yellow to be brought from the 

molloccos, Banda & other places in lunckf of Bantam, & other 
the Islandf, to yo u , & yo u thereto by 2 them, & lay the same in 
yo r warehowse, to be reddie Clensed & fitted for o r shipps, when 
they shall theare arive, Then 3 to send o r ships to the places to 
fetch them, In w ch Consideracon yo u are to remember, to thinke 
on the pricf they may be had at, beinge soe brought to Bantam of 
the Custome and chardge there, of the saffetie of the place, from 
the invasion of the Portugalls w ch yt is thought they will assaye 
by Comand of the kinge of Spaigne (haueing now peace w th the 
Hollenders 4 ) wherew th yt shall not be amisse to acquainte that 
kinge, that he may endevor to prevent yt : We thinke yf this 
could be brought to passe much hazard of o r shipps and men in 
comeinge to those partf may be prevented, o r voyadge shortened, 
to o r greate ease in victualls and mens wages, & the people of the 
Country better Contented in that their meanes of liveinge is not 
taken from them, for w ch yo u write they hate the Hollenders and 
much bewaile their owne hindrance. And as yo u haue sent vs a 
lournall of yo r accomptf, we desire in like manner to haue a 
lournall pfectlie drawen out, and sent vs by this shipp of all o r 
busines, as the same hath beene passed there, from S r lames 
Lancasters comeinge thence, vntill the begininge of yo r chardge, 
aswell of William Starkey his accomptf , w th the ballance thereof, 
deliuered to Edmund Scott, As alsoe a pfect lournall of 
Edmund Scottf accomptf, and the ballance thereof deliu r ed 
over to Gabriell Towerson & the same carefullie pvsed, That 
entrance thereof may be made into o r Bookf accordinglie. 

1 Blank in MS.; perhaps sandalwood, or "saunders" as it was also called, is 
intended. 

3 Buy. 3 Than. 

4 A truce for twelve years had just been concluded between Spain and her revolted 
provinces. 

U 



290 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



Nowe yo tl shall vnderstand that vpon the hopes we haue of 
money and goodes better and more ample trade in those partP : we 

sentbyCapt: David r 

Middieton. haue resolued yearelie by Godf ^mission and 

.help, to send some shippinge vnto yo u : and for that cause 
not being fitted w th a better at this present haue furnished and 
sent out this o r shipp called the Expedicon of the burthen of 
240 tonnes, whereof Edmund Musgraue is m r and lohn Davies 1 
Pilott, And therein haue laden 13 ballettf cont 41 Clo : 40 
devonshire karsayes. 12 hamshire kf. 10 Northerne karseys : & 
46 tonns of Iron the nomber sortf Cullers and prices, being 
expressed in the Invoise hereinclosed, alsoe Chests Cont 

Royalls of 8. All w ch money and goodf we haue 
appointed Captaine David Middieton w th yo r Councell, advise, 
and assistaunce to make sale of, and ymploy for vs, either at the 
Molloccos, Banda, Bantam, or els wheare, as in his & yo r dis- 
crecons shall seeme fitt for o r most benefitt, Consideringe what 
sortf and quantities of those East Indian m r chandize our other 
shipps haue laden there whome we haue appointed cheefe 
Comander in the said Shipp, and for whose assistaunce we 
would haue the aforesaid Thomas Emmesworth Henry Sydall 
and Augustine Spaldinge to accompany & assist him, for the 
better pformance of the ladinge thereof, either at the Molluccos 
Banda or ellswhere, as yo u shall resolue : And the said Emse- 
worth or Siddall to write and send vs a pfect accompt, of the 
whole pceedinge therein, and this further we advise yo n , That 

1 This is John Davis of Limehouse, who has been so persistently confused with 
his more famous namesake of Arctic fame. He had been in the First Voyage under 
Lancaster, in Sir Edward Michel home's expedition of 1604-6, and (first as pilot and 
afterwards as master) in the Third Voyage with Captain David Middieton. After 
serving in the Fifth Voyage (here referred to), he went out again in the Ninth Voyage 
(1612-15^ and on the captain's death succeeded to the command and brought the ship 
home. In 1617 we find him master of the Swan, which was captured by the Dutch 
off Banda, and the crew made prisoners. After his release, he was appointed pilot 
major of the James, which sailed in January, 1621. He was by this time advanced 
in years, and probably weakened in constitution by his intemperate living ; and in 
December of the same year he died, while the James was on a voyage to Jambi in 
Sumatra. Davis, though an able and intelligent seaman (witness his " Ruter," or 
sailing directions, printed in Purchas), was headstrong and quarrelsome, and much 
addicted to drink ; and this perhaps accounts for the Company's unwillingness (in 
spite of his experience) to employ him in posts of greater responsibility. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



291 



whatsoeu r shall be either sould or bought for this shipps ladinge 
This voyadge to be must be done as a pticular stocke a pte from the 

a particular acct : .r i- i o **>i 1 /-* 

aparte from the rest rest of o r busincs Soe as yf there be any Cause 
to vse any of o r goodf \v ch are there belonginge to 
o r generall accompt the same is to be deliuered to this stocke, 
by weight, measure, or tale, And the same Valewed as yt is 
there worth : In like manner yf any thinge of the goodf sent 
in this Shipp shall be left ther vnsould, the same in like case 
to be valued as yt is there then worth, & a note of all the said 
quantities & valuacons to be sent to vs by this Shipp, That o r 
accomptf there may be rightlie chardged therew th and a due 
repticon made accordinglie : And for that we vnderstand 
Augustine Spaldinge behaueth him selfe both honestlie and 
dilligentlie in matters comitted to his chardge for o r occasions, 
we are contented to increase his wages from what he formerlie 
had, to xl s p monneth (yf he be liueinge) The same wages to 
beginn at the arriuall of this Shipp att Bantam, not doubtinge 
but that in his honest and faithfull carriadge toward^ vs, he will 
deserue the same. 

ffurther concerninge Thomas Emmseworth o r desire is that 
the shipp beinge laden and retourned from the 

Tho : Hemsworth. 

Molluccoes Banda or elswheare to Bantam : 
That he stay w th yo u in o r howse there, and take chardge of 
the passinge of o r busines to accompt, being assisted and 
acquainted w th the manner of m r chandizeinge there, by some 
of you best acquainted therew th : And that yearelie we may 
receiue a true lournall of what hath passed in o r affaires there, 
by you, Soe as we may knowe trulie the pfect state thereof: 
we have alsoe sent yo u herew th , the Coppies of o r tres formerlie 
sent yo n , aswell by m r Keelinge, as by m r Sharpey o r twoe 
Generalls in the third and fourth Voyadgf : And we wish 
you, That yf yo u cann, you doe lade and send vs any other 
Comodities rather then pepp, Yett rather then the shipp shall 
wante or retourne w th out ladinge, Then to send vs some pepp. 
w ch is more at lardge specified in o r Comission for the Captaine. 

Lastlie forasmuch as we haue vnderstoode, That Gabriell 
Towerson hath a greate desier to retourne home, we are Con- 
tented that he soe doe : hopinge that he hath not soe lightlie 
reguarded the trust reposed in him, That he would abandon the 

u i 



29 2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

place, before o r leaue and direccon, neither doe we thinke that 
any of yo u all will soe lightlie reguard either yo r reputacon in 
the world, or yo r Creditt w th vs, That yo u will leaue yo r place 
of ymployment, before we giue o r Consent, The like leaue we 
alsoe giue to Henry Siddall to returne for England, if he 
may be spared, wherein we wish you to haue reguard to keepe 
a convenient nomber in o r howse both for the defence of yo r 
selues and o r goodf, as to giue releefe and supplie to such 
ffactories, as haue beene setled by m r William Keelinge in 
any other place thereabout^: And whereas we finde by yo r 
accomptf, That yo u receiue yo r sallarie or wages at iiij 9 the 
Ryall of : 8 : and soe pay yo r selues, we haue thought good 
to lett yo u knowe that we pay for the same 4 s 7 d besidf the 
adventure thither : wherefore we thinke yt fitt That yf yo u 
receiue yo r wages there fforasmuch as we Vnderstand that 
they are worth there : 8 s : That yo u sett them at such an 
indifferent rate as may neither be too lowe for vs, nor too high 
for yo r selues, whereof by yo r next letters we desire to receiue 
some satisfaccon : A hoe we vnderstand that yo u make greate 
benefitt by Casshes and dealinge there w th other Comodities & 
yett we finde nothinge putt to o r accomptf in that respect. 

Wherefore we could wish and hereby requier yo 11 , That such 
a course may be taken w th the stocke that remaines in yo r handf 
from tyme to tyme, That thereby a proffitt may be made thereof 
toward^ the greate chardgf of howsekeepinge & otherwyse 
expended there : whereof we make noe doubte but yo u will be 
carefull, And soe Comitt yo u to the proteccon of Thalmightie. 
London the xv th of Aprill 1609 

Yo r loueinge freindf 
Thomas Smyth 
William Romeny 
William Greenwell 
Robert Bell 
Robert Middleton 
W m : Cater 
lohn Busbridge. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



293 



Edmond Scott and George Scott Citizens and 
grocers of London bound vnto S r Tho : Smyth of London 
knight in 500** to be paid vnto him, or his certeine 
Atturney, Execute" or Administrato rs ad vsum Gubnator 
et Societatis m r cator Londinensiu ad Indias Orientales 
negotiantiu. That the said Edmond Scott his Executors 
Administrators & Assignes doe stand to the arbitram* of 
those mentioned in this Condicon of awarde : And 
S r Tho : Smyth bound in the like some That the w th in 
named Gou r no r & Company of m r chauntf of London 
tradinge into theast Indies & their Successo 1 ' 3 shall doe 
the like. 1 

HE Condicon of this Obligacon is such That yf &c : 
shall at all tymes heereafter stand to, abide, obay 
obserue pforme, fulfill, & keepe the award, arbitram*, 
order, determinacon & ludgm* of Rofct Middleton, 
Robert lohnson, Raphe ffreeman and Christopher Cletherowe 
Citizens & m r chauntf of London, Arbitrate 18 in- 
differently named elected & chosen aswell on the 
pte and behalfe of &c : as on the pte of &c : to 
arbitrate awarde deeme & iudge betweene the said &c : and the 
said &c : for touchinge & conc r ninge all accomptC Reckonningf 
debtf debatf and demandf whatsoeu 1 ' now dependinge betweene 
the said &c : & the said &c : Except all such seu r all Adventures 
& stocke as the said Edmond hath here adventured w th the said 
Company & the proffittf thereof: Soe as the same awarde 
determinacon & ludgm* of the said Arbitrate 1 ' 8 be made & yealded 
vp in writeinge vnder their handfj & scales on this side or before 
the 24 th day of lulie next ensueinge the date of this present 




The bond of award 
betweene the Com- 
panic & Edmond 
Scott. i6c 



Obligacon w th out fraude or covyn. 
Obligacon shalbe &c : Or ells &c : 



That then this present 



1 To be dated about March or April, 1609. For a note on Edmond Scott see 
Page 34. 




FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

[ILLS of Adventure 1 giuen by the Gou r nor & Comp: of 

East India Marchantf to the seu r all Adventurers in 

the 4 th Voyadge w th their seuerall somes, & the same 
vnderwritten by Richard Atkinson 2 as by him ex- 
amined, before the ensealeinge thereof. The w ch are as ffolloweth. 
Viz to. 

S r Thomas Smyth .... 

William Greenwell . 

S r William Romeney . 

Thomas Symond^ 

To m r3 William Cockaine 

Robert Sandie 

Oliver Stile 

lohn Eldred 

Richard Humble . ' . 

William fferrers 

Humfrey Basse 

Robert Brooke 

Thomas ffarrington . 

Raphe ffreeman 

Martyn ffreeman 

Robert Johnson 

Robert Chilcott 

Thomas Stylle 

Robert Bell 

To m r lohn Busbridge . 

Richard Burrell 

Richard Gossen 

lohn Highlord . 

William Cater 

William Berblocke . 



616 .13". 4 d 
550 .0.0 
500 .0.0 
700 
550 
550 

550 
600 
660 

550 
700 
700 
600 
550 
550 
650 
550 

550 
650 

550 
550 
550 
660 



. 550 

1 For the form of the " bill," see page 273. 

8 Richard Atkinson, "servant to the governor," was chosen cashier for the Fourth 
Voyage on 28th July, 1607 ; and in January, 1608/9, having been " ever found verie 
" faithfull & very fitt for those businesses," was appointed general cashier to the 
Company. In March, 1614/5, some of the secretary's work was transferred to 
Atkinson. In August, 1621, he had to submit to a reduction of salary from 150;. to 
ioo/. He seems to have died in the early part of the following year, and was 
succeeded by William Hurt. 

3 See note on page 275. 



THE EAST IN til A COMPANY. 



295 



To m r . 



William 

Christopher 

Richard 

Raphe 

Thomas 

Henry 

Humfrey 

Richard 

Robert 

Thomas 

Richard 

Edward 

lohn 

Richard 

Roger 

leofferey 

Humfrey 

Thomas 

Richard 

William 

Richard 

Edward 

Henry 

George 

Thomas 

Thomas 

William 

Stephen 

The lo : 

Roger 

lohn S* 



Millett 

Nicholls , 

Pointell 

Hamo r 

Henshawe . 

Robinson . 

Robinson . 

Ironside 

Robinson , 

Westrowe . 

Maplesden , 

Allen 

Bancke 

Beale 

Dye 

Kirbie 

Smythe 

White 

Stratford 

Bonham 

Deane 

Lutterforde 

Bridgman . 

Bennett 

Whiteley . 

Cutlar 

Compton . 

Harvey 

Cavendishe 

Clarke 

Andrew 



550 


. O . 


O 


550 


. . 





600 


. . 





700 


. O . 





550 


. . 





550 


. O . 





550 


. O . 





600 


. . 


O 


550 


. . 





550 


. . 


O 


550 


. . 


O 


550 


. . 





600 


. . 





600 


. . 





550 


. . 





660 


. . 





550 


. O . 




550 


. . 




550 


. O . 




860 


. O . 




550 


. . 




550 


. O . 




550 


. . 




675 


. O . 




660 


. . 




550 


. O . 




550 


. . 




550 


. . 




600 


. . 




550 


. . 




200 


. O . 





In the name of God Amen the 14 th day of Aprill 
Anno dni 1609. A Comission agreed vpon and sett 
downe by us the Gou r no r Deputy and Comittees of the 
Marchauntf of London tradeinge to the East Indies, 



29 6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

asvvell for the better direccon of o r loueinge freind, and 
principal! ffactor Captaine David Middleton, As for all 
other ffacto rs , Master, Pylott, Pursers Mariners, and 
other Officers or psonns goeinge in this o r present 
intended Voyadge to the East Indies in the good shipp 
named the Expedicon : w ch we humbly beseech Almightie 
God, to blesse w th a happy successe and Conclucon. 1 




whereas we the Gou r no r Deputie Comittees 
& Marchauntf aforesaid have to o r greate chardge 
prepared the said shipp named the Expedicon of the 
burthen of 240 Tonnes, wherein Edmund Musgraue 
goeth m r for a voyadge by Godf grace to be made to the East 
Indies, And haue furnished the same sufficientlie and in plenti- 
full manner, w th men, tackle, victualles and all other needfull 
puisions for such a voyadge, of a spetiall trust and Confidence, 
w c ^ we haue in the integritie and iust carriadge of o r said loueinge 
freinde David Middleton: we doe appointe and authorize him 
Captaine to goe in the same shipp, and to Comand all the 
menn therein, haueinge pcured him sufficient authoritie from o r 
Sou r eigne lord the kingf ma tie : in that behalfe : Not doubtinge 
but that he will soe behaue himselfe, as he may be both feared 
and loued. And that he will w th all his dilligence and endeavors 
prosequute o r designes & labour to bringe this o r voyadge to a 
happie end. 

2 Item for that Religious gou'nm* and exercise, doth best 
bynde menn to pforme their Duties: We doe appointe and order: 
That prayers be said Morneinge & eveninge in the shipp, And 
the whole Company called therevnto, That all ioinctlie may w th 
reverence & humility pray vnto Almightie God to blesse & 
preserue them from all dangers in this longe and tedious 
voyadge : And for better pformance thereof we haue deliu r ed a 
Bible vnto the Pursar. 

3 Item that noe blasphemeinge of God sweareinge thefte 
drunckennes or other lyke misdeameanors be vsed, But that 
the same be sevearelie punnished, And that noe diceinge, or 
other unlawfull games be pmitted, ffor that the same ar most 

1 This Commission was read and approved at a Court held i3th April, 1609. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 297 

comolie the begyninge of quarrells & many tymes murther a iust 
occasion of Godf wrath and vengeance from w ch the Lord deliver 
vs all : wherefore we doe order That there shall be ponishmentf 
prouided sett vpp and published in the said shipp for such 
Offences, whereby eu r y man may take notice what he ought to 
avoied. 

4 Item That noe liquor be spilt in the Ballast of the shipp 
or filthines be left w th in bourde, w ch in heate breadeth noysome 
smells and infeccon : But that the overlopps and other placf 
of the shipp, be kept cleane and sweete w ch is a notable preser- 
vacon of health. 

5 Item That Contynuall and true lournalls, be kept of eu r y 
daies course, and Navigacon duringe the whole voyadge, w th a 
true relacon of eu r y thinge that passeth : And this to be done 
seu r ally by Captaine, Master, Pilott, the Marchaunt Masters mate 
and pursar and they at Convenient tymes to Conferr togither 
aboute the same, To thend that yf any of them haue forgotten 
what an other hath obserued the same may be added whereby 
a pfect discourse may be sett downe to be presented to the 
Gou r no r and Company when God shall graunte the said shipp 
safe retourne and to be kept for better direccon of posteritie. 

6 Item That the Company & M r take due notice of the 
seu r all provisions, deliu r ed to the said shipp, and to settle the 
same in the chardge of the Officers appointed for that purpose. 
And that the same be entred in the Pursars booke vnderwritten 
by the said Officers, To thend that such thinge as are puided, 
for their needfull supplies, may not be ymbecilled, And that 
nothinge thereof, be ymployed for any vse whatsoeuer, w th out 
warrant vnder the hand of the Captaine, directed to the Officer 
that hath such chardge w ch warrant shall serue for his dischardge 
in his accompte otherwyse to be awnswearable for the same w th 
his wagf , And eu r y such warrant to be registred in the pursars 
booke, The day of the monneth & the occasion, And this to 
be done alsoe by the Pursar vpon forfecture of soe much out of 
his wages. 

7 Item That at eu r y place where yo u shall water and refresh 
yo r selues yo u shall call the whole Company together giueinge 
them most stricte & straight chardge and warneinge not to 



2Q 8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

straggle but to behaue them selues peaceably & Civillie towardf 
the people of that place (yf any be there) the better to pcure 
their freindshipp towardf the supply of yo r wantf , And the like 
to be done and vsed, in eu r y place where yo u come, least the losse 
of yo r Hues and ou r throwe of o r voyadge, pay for yo r disorders, 
besidf an vtter discreditt to o r Nacon : And that yo r men doe 
vse, a discreete meane in eateinge of fruitf, fresh victualls, or 
drinkeinge of water least they surfett, and fall into diseases, 
whereof we haue had too much experience : And the better to 
restraine vnrulie appetitf : We thinke fit That yo u the Captaine 
doe appointe some of the discreetest in yo r Company to pcure 
and prouide in such places, what yo u want : And the same to be 
first brought vnto yo u , and yo u to repte the same to yo r Company 
as yo u shall see good and needfull, And that none presume to 
doe contrary w th out seveare ponishment : Alsoe that yo u haue 
a spetiall care, to see the sicke releeued w th such fresh meatf and 
other Comfortable thinges, wherew th we haue furnished the said 
shipp for that purpose : And that the same be not otherwyse 
spent in Ryott & banquettinge, and soe the sicke pishe for want 
of thingf needfull. 

8. Item when yo u haue refreshed yo r selues at Saldania or 
elswhere thereabout^, where yo u shall thinke most convenient 
and good for harbor, & plentie of victualls : yo 11 shall apply yo r 
selues, and w th all possible speede endevour yo r course for 
Bantam, And being arriued there, yo u shall Conferr and take 
aduise of o r ffactors for or Conc r ninge yo r voyadge to the 
Molluccos or Banda : And shall take alonge w th you thither such 
of o r said ffactors there as yo u shall thinke good, espetially 
Syddall for his experience as alsoe Spaldinge whome we hould 
the fittest psonns in that behalfe : But yf that yo u cannott pcure 
yo r ladeinge at the Molluccoes and Banda : Then we leaue the 
same to yo r discrecon, to be done at Bantam, or any other place 
where yo u shall thinke will be most for o r proffittf. 

9 Item yo u shall espetiallie foresee, and take care, That in 
ladeinge either Cloues Nutmegg^ or Mace yo u cleanes them as 
much as yo 11 cann from dust and Rumps, That the shipp be not 
stuffed w th such vnproffitable ware as is not worth the Custome, 
And soe we loose all o r chardgf : wherefore rather burne the 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 299 

same, then 1 lade it in the shipp And be carefull to buy dry 
Cloues and not such as are greene. 

10 Item That yo u be very carefull to haue yo r due and full 
weight and the same putt into baggf nombred and marked and 
sent abourd the shipp w th some ffactor or other trustie psonn, w th 
a ire Conteyneinge the pticular of eu r y bagge vnder the nomber, 
The same ire to be deliuered to the pursar, whome we chardge to 
weigh eu r y bagge, at the takeing of yt into the shipp, whereby 
he may see that the weight is accordinge to the ire receiued, 
keepinge eu r y ire and entringe the Content^ 1 in his booke whereby 
yf any error happen yt may be found out, w ch we wish yo u the 
Captaine to examyne eu r y nighte That there growe noe abuse. 

11 Item That the purser be Contynually aboorde the shipp 
and take true notice of all things whatsoeu 1 ' are brought into the 
shipp or carried out eyther by the Captaine Marchaunt ffacto r 
Master Mariner, the pursar himselfe or any other whosoeuer, 
And to enter the same in his booke vnder the name of the Owner 
that eu r y one may haue his due at the returne, As the pursar will 
awnsweare yt w th the losse of his wagf : And yo u the Captaine 
to giue the pursar stricte chardge in this behalfe. 

12 Item, That there be but one hatch open (yf yt may be) 
at the ladeinge of the shipp, and thother hatches to be locked vp, 
and that the master or his Mate and the purser to stand by the 
open hatche when any goodf are shott into hould lockeinge the 
same vpp when they haue left worke, and the key to be giuen to 
the Capteine to keepe. 

13 Item That nothinge be bought, but what is espetiall 
good And that yo u doe not overwett the Cloues, 2 badd nutmeggf 
and mace haue taught vs to advise o r ffactors to be more carefull. 

14 Item, for that voyadgf of this Condicon and chardge 
cannott admitt any priuate trade our will is, And we doe 
expreslie order That neither yo u the Captaine, nor any other, 
vpon any pticuler, or other accompte, then the generall and 
ioincte stocke doe lade, or deale w th any of the Comodities 
herevnder expressed (Vizt) pepp, Cloues, Nutmeggf, Mace, 
Synamon, Ginger Indico Callicoes Ambergreece, Muske Alloes 
Beniamyn Gumlacka Rawe & sleeue silke Pearles Dyamondf 

1 Than. 3 Some words appear to have been omitted here (cp. page 258). 



3 oo 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



Bezar stones : And that yf any shall soe doe the same shall 
be applyed to thaccompt of the Company as o r owne propp 
goodf It beinge noe way reasonable That wee should pay them 
their wages w th meate and drinke, And they lade those thingf 
in o r shipp, w ch should defray o r chard ge. 

15. Item That in eu r y place where yo u come and trade yo u 
shall compare their waightf & measures w th o rs before yo u buye 
To thend yo u may knowe the Better what to doe And howe to 
make yo r reckoning? , ffor w ch purpose we haue putt a Chest w th 
weight^ into our said Shippe. 

16. Item we straightlie chardge That the best and sufficientest 
of o r ffactors be appointed to wey, what is bought by weight on 
the land And to keepe a pfect Booke thereof that the same may 
be nightlie conferred w th the pursars booke, whereby errors or 
abuses may be the better found out. 

17 Item we straightlie chardge that noe excessiue drinkeinge 
feastinge or banquettinge, or shooteinge of of Gonnes be at any 
tyme made or vsed either aboorde the Shipp att Sea, or on land, 
The same beinge a greate waste and Consumpcon of victualls, 
wyne and powder & the cause of many diseases & disorders in 
the Company And therefore to be spent w th discrecon and 
spareinge. 

18 Item That yo u matt the insidf of the shipp before yo 11 put 
or lade any spice in her, espetiallie where yo u lade Cloues Pepp 
Nutmeggf & Mace, And that yo" make choise of such Nutmeggf, 
as be lardge and sounde, And att the ladeinge thereof not to lyme 
them too much, for that doth burne them, Alsoe that in any 
Case, yo u lay the Mace in Canisters in some fitt place by yt selfe, 
That yt be not spoyled by the heate of the other spicf, takeinge 
good heede to buy that w ch is bright, & not wythered nor red, 
nor darke browne Colored And lykewyse for Cloues to buy such 
as shall be free of dust, The w ch those people doe vse to putt 
amongst them for their advantage in the waight. 

19 Item That yf necessitie drawe yo u at the ladeinge of any 
Cloues for better setlinge of them, to cast water vpon them, lett 
yt be but asprinkelinge w tb some thinge for the purpose like a 
wateringe pott, for that too much wett in o r Cloues in other 
voyadgf , hath brought vs greate damadge. 

20 Item That yf o r ould Cloth w ch was left at Bantam, be 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 301 

not sould, Then yo u shall Conferr and advyse w th o r ffactors there 
howe the same shall or may be vented, either by sendinge yt to 
Banda : or by leaueinge (yf neede be) a ffactory at Banda w th 
the same and addinge therevnto some money and some other 
Comodities as yo u shall thinke fitt. 

21 Item That yo u the Captaine doe giue often notice to all 
.psons goeinge w th yo u in the shipp, what they are to obserue by 
this o r Comission & direccons, And that yo u giue espetiall 
chardge to all o v ffactors. That they make diligent inquiry what 
Comodities are to be bought or bartered for in eu r y Island, or 
place where they shall come or arrive And what English 
m r chandize may be there vented And of what kinde & Color 
most vendible 

22 Item That yo u remember, aduise & putt o r ffactors at 
Bantam in mynde that they doe their best endevo rs to procure the 
Chineses to bringe from Chiney sieve and soweinge silkes of the 
Colo r and sizes we haue now deliu r ed vnto yo u As alsoe some 
Rawe silkf that we may fall into some trade w th them, And see 
yf they can sell any of our English Cloth vnto them whereby to 
bringe them to the vse thereof. 

23 Item, That yo 11 remember to doe yo r best endevo r to 
bringe for the Lo : Threr some parrattf Munkeys Marmesates, 
or other strange beastf and fowles, That yo u esteeme rare and 
delightfull. 1 

24 Item, That for the quantities of moneys & m r chandize 
putt into this our said shipp, we referr yo u to o r invoise deliu r ed 
vnto yo u herew th , togither w th the pticular sortf Collors and prices, 
w th patternes of all sortf, whereby to make sale. 

25 Item whereas heretofore the Company haue receiued 
greate wronge by the Generalls Captaines Masters and Mariners 
admittance of voluntary men to goe in o r shipps : We therefore 
hereby straightlie chardge yo u the Captaine Master & other 
Officers, That yo u suffer none such to goe alonge w th you w ch putt 
the Company to greate chardge besidf many other Inconvenience, 
Nor any but such as are, or shall be allowed of by o r direccon and 
whose names are entered into o r Bookf . 

26 Item, for that yt is vnfitt, and inconvenient, That o r trade 

1 See note, page 130. 



302 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

be ympted vnto any, but to o r generall Company we doe hereby 
expreslie order & appointe, That yo u chardge all o r ffacto rs , not to 
write or aduise any their pticular freindf or others of the prices 
of any Comodities, either there bought or sould But onelie in 
their generall tres to the Gou r nor and Company. 

27 Item That yo u the Captaine at yo r returne from Bantam 
for England doe bringe w th yo u vnto vs from thence an Inventory 
of all o r goodc debtf and moneys then remayneinge in those 
partf. And that yo u putt to o r generall accompte all guiftf 
present^ & gratificacons w ch shall be giuen by any forreine prince, 
potentate or others, to whome we haue hertofore giuen or sent 
any present^, or to whome there shall be nowe any given. 

28 Item, That by agenerall Consent of yo u the Captaine 
ffactor Master Pilott & Mariners, some good order be by yo u sett 
downe in writeinge, soe soone as yo u come to Sea, conc r ninge 
the dispoticon of dead mens goodf in the voyadge by sale at the 
maste, or otherwyse for buyeinge, sellinge borroweinge and 
lendinge one an other, And orderinge what Sallary shall be 
allowed the pursar, vpon eu r y pound, for keepinge accompte 
thereof to avoied Controu r sie and question heereafter, And eu r y 
Mariner and others in the shipp to sett their hand or marke vnto 
the same order : But yf any ffactor shall happen to dye, Then 
his goodc bookf accomptf & other thingf are to be safelie 
preserued and brought home for England. 

29 Item, that for better preservacon of health, yo 11 doe from 
tyme to tyme, as the water Caske shall be emptied of fresh water, 
cause the same to be forthw th filled againe w th salt water for 
prevencon of leakeinge & mustines w ch must be often shifted. 

30 Item, touchinge the facte Comitted in the Indies by 
S r Edward Michelborne thoughe we knowe o 1 ' selues to be 
meerelie innocent therein, yett yf by any meanes, we or o r goodf 
should be dampnified thereby, we doe wish yo u to seeke to that 
kinge & Magistrate for redresse & recompence thereof, The w ch yf 
you cannot obtaine, Then o r will and order is that you vse the 
benefitt of o r kingC ma^ Comission giuen yo u in that behalfe. 

31 Item, That yf the said David Middleton Captaine shall 
happen to dye goeinge outward^ in this present voyadge (w ch 
God forbid) then we will & appointe That Thomas Emmesworth 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 303 

m r chaunt & ffacto r in this present voyadge shall succeede in his 
place, and be principall Comander in the said shipp vntill shee 
come to Bantam : And that yf the said David Middleton shall 
happen to dye at Bantam, That then yo u the Master Pilott and 
other cheefe Officers, w ch shall arive att Bantam shall Conferr and 
advise w th o r ffactors at Bantam, w ch of them there shall be held & 
esteemed the fittest psonn to succeede in his place & roome : 
And therevpon he w ch they shall soe thinke fittest, our will is, 
shall pcure the ladeinge of o r said shipp, and retourne as 
principall Comander therein for England. 

32 Item, for that we finde best proffitt, by the lardge sorte of 
pepp, both for the prices w ch yo u pay aswell for thone as for thoter, 
we will that in any case yo u buy of the lardgest sorte, And lett 
the same be putt by yt selfe into the shipp, That yt be not 
mingled w th any other : yett o r desire is not to haue any pepp 
except yt be to saue dead fraight. 

33. Item we doe appointe and expreslie order, That yo u the 
Captaine w th Thomas Emmesworth, the pursar & such others as 
yo u the Captaine shall thinke meete to call vnto yo 11 , doe dulie 
examyn the dealeinge of all or any of o r ffactors at Bantam, either 
in or for o r generall accompte or otherwyse or of all or any of 
their priuate trade or trades, since their goeinge thither: And 
that yf yo u shall therevpon finde all or any of them, to haue dealt 
or traded for them selfes, or to haue willfullie or cuningelie 
abused and wronged vs therein, or to haue demeaned them selues 
contrary to o r expresse order formerly giuen vnto them in that 
behalfe : Then we will that yo u take notice of their misde- 
meanors, and to admonish them, for reformacon thereof, As 
alsoe to c r tifie vnto vs the pticuler abuses by them or any of them 
Comitted. 

34. Item, Lastlie but w th the first to be remembred : We 
chardge and pray yo u all, To haue an espetiall care and reguard : 
And to haue yo r Eyes open to all devises & practices w ch may be 
wrought against yo u , or 1 shipp, or goodf in eu r ry or any place 
where yo 11 come or shall ariue keepinge a Contynuall watch 
whereby yo u may be ready to prevent any mischeefe intended 
against you, suspect all howe freindlie soeu r they seeme : Be 

1 A mistake for " o r ." 



304 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

ready still and stand vpon yo r guarde, Trust not yo r saffety to 
the carelesse attendance of the Comon Mariners whoe will not 
loose their present pleasures or ease, though the losse of their 
Hues or 1 shipp and goodf depend vpon yt : And albeyt we haue 
sett downe eu r y thinge w ch we remember & desier to be done in 
pticular yett yf you the Captaine David Middleton the said 
Thomas Emmesworth Edmund Musgraue M r , lohn Davis Pilott 
& Thomas Cleyburne 3 shall vpon due Consideracon and Con- 
sultacon together finde cause to alter any thinge before yo u come 
vnto Bantam w ch we haue herein sett downe as aforesaid havinge 
w th good advise resolued therevpon, We referr the same to yo r 
discrecons : And for better assistaunce and more wary pceedinge 
in all courses, vpon all occacons, & in all o r affaires and busines 
for or conc r ninge this present voyadge : We will & appoint the 
said Thomas Emmesworth (soe longe as he shall contynew w th 
you) and Edmund Musgraue lohn Davis & Thomas Cleyburne to 
advise & Consulte w th you the Captaine of and aboute all thinge w ch 
shall be needfull therein, whome we wish yo u to ymbrace and vse 
w th a loueinge respect & freindly & diligently to hearken to their 
Councells puttinge in execution, what shall w th good deliberacon 
be soe, by yo u & them agreed vpon together, ffor the better 
avoiedinge of such Contencons as were the last voyadge in 
the Consent. And thus not doubtinge of yo r faithfull care & 
diligence herein : we comend yo u and your endevo rs to Godf 
providence, whome we hartilie pray to blesse you all & o r affaires, 
And to guide yo u w th his feare & defend yo u from all dangers 
Amen. London the 14 th day of Aprill 1609. 

p me David Middleton 
Sealed & deliu r ed in the p r sence of 

Richard Mountney 3 

Richard Atkinson. 

1 A mistake for "of." 

2 Thomas Clayborne was appointed master's mate at 61. per month on i3th March, 
1609. It had been proposed to offer him the post of pilot, probably before it was 
known that Davis was willing to go to sea again. Clayborne had previously been 
with Sir Henry Middleton in the Second Voyage, of which he wrote the account given 
in Purchas. 

3 Elected in July, 1607, "husband" for the Company, a post which, with some 
slight interruptions, he held for very many years. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 305 

To o r loueinge freindf m r W m Kealinge, m r W m : 
Hawkins & to all other o r Officers & servant^ in any o r 
Ships Comeinge out of the East Indies. 1 




o r hartie Comendations &c : Whereas the 
Officers of his ma^ Customes doe vsuallie send 
some of their servauntf abourde all shipps comeinge 
to any pte of this Realme to haue care that by noe 
meanes his ma*f Customes may be defrauded, to avoyde all 
blame to o r selues and yo u , we haue thought 

4 of this Tenor * ' 

deuujed ^o m r wors- good to requier yo u that yf any of their said 
servant^ shall come abourde of any of ou 
Shipps that yo u doe intertaine them in kinde and loueing manner 
for the better execution of their place & his ma 1 ^ service. And 
further accordinge to o r instruccons formerlie giuen yo u , we 
earnestly wish & requier yo u carefullie to keepe and reserue for 
his ma tie : & the Lord^ all such rare fowles beast or other thingf 
as are by you, or any of yo r Company brought from those ptf , 
and to vse such meanes as none of them be sould or giuen away 
before they come to o r handf , for the comeinge thereof to the 
handf of his ma tie : or the Councell or any other by any other 
meanes then from vs, will be some disgrace & discontent to the 
Company. And thus not doubtinge of yo r care herein we bid you 
farewell London the 14 th of August 1609. 

Yo r loueing freindf the Company of Marchauntf of 
London tradeinge to the East Indies. 



1 " And further yt is ordered that twoe Ires be written in the name of the Companie. 

" The one Thother to m r W m : Kealeinge, m r W m : Hawkins, & to 

" all other the Companies Officers & servauntes in any their shipps comeinge out of 
' the East Indies in the behalfe of the Officers of his Ma ties : Customes, & for reserue- 
11 inge of all strange fowles & beastes &c : for the kinge and Councell, of w ch Teno r 
" ffower Ires were written as appereth in the Register & deliu r ed to m r Worstenholme 
"to be sent and disposed of as should be thought fitt." (Court Minutes, iqth Aug., 
1609-) 

X 



306 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

To o r loueinge freindf Anthony Marlowe & ffrancis 
Bucke or either of them at Lisborne 1 




o r hartie Comendacons &c : yo r tres dated in 
Lisborne the I5 tb of lulie last we haue receiued 
whereby as we are verrie sorrie to heare of yo r hard 
mishapps, soe we haue done & will vse all possible 
and speedie meanes that in vs lieth for yo r releefe and inlardgm*, 
one of this Tenor de- & will be readie to pforme what other things yo u 
liuredtomrEidred doe requ i er o f vs by yo r said tres i In the meane 

season we haue thought good by this occasion not onelie to 
make knowne vnto yo u o r greefe for this yo r distresse, but 
alsoe to advertice yo u that for yo r better releefe & Comfort 
we haue dealt w th o r good freind m r lohn Eldred, 2 to giue 
order to his servant W m : Squier remayneinge at Lisborne, to 
furnish yo u for yo r present necessities w th the some of Twoe 
hundred Duckettf yf yo u shall need soe much & further (yf 
need be) w tb the some of three or fower hundred Duckettf 
more, yf for the same yo u cann assuredlie by any good meanes 
there, worke yo r inlardgm*: Wherein yo 11 are to be well 
aduiced & be of some c r teine growndf before yo u parte w th any 
money & thus wishinge yo u to Comforte yo r selues in the lord 
whoe will bringe theis yo r troubles to a blessed yssewe in his 
good tyme as may make most to his glorie & yo r Comfort^ in 
hast we end as we begunn the i4th of August 1609. 

Yo r loueing freindf the Company of Marchauntf of 
London tradeinge to the East Indies. 



1 See page 219. This letter was read and committed to the charge of Mr. Eldred, 
" whoe is intreated & hath taken vpon him to doe the same & to furnish them w*h 
" moneys accordinge to the Tenor of the same Ires," at a Court Meeting on i4th Aug., 
1609. 

2 See page 164, note 6. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



3<>7 



To the right wo 11 : my very loueinge freindf S r : 
Thomas Walsingham knight & other his Ma'f: Justices 
of the Peace Assembled at Crayford in Kent or 
elswheare. 1 




my hardest Comendacons &c: Wheareas 
Anthonie Emerson and shipwright^ latelie 

hired by the East India Company & by them ymployed 
about the builedinge of their Shipps at Deptford, 
doe notw th standinge their said agreem* now absent them selues 
from the said worke to the greate hindraunce thereof, and evill 
example vnto others. I ame in the name of the said Companie 
to intreate yo r favo rs herein, espetiallie beinge a Case of greate 
ymportaunce for the hono r and proffitt of this kingdome 
Whereby they may be soe ponished accordinge to the statute 
in that respect puided, as yt be a warninge vnto them and others 
to abstaine from the like. And thus not doubtinge of yo r kinde 
favo ra herein I Comitt yo u to the Tuicon of Thalmightie. London 
the 25 th of Septemfc . 1609. 

Yo r loueinge freind 
'Tho: Smyth. 



To the right wo u : my very loueinge freinde S r 
Robert Mansfeild knight one of the principall Officers 
of his Ma^ : Navy. 2 




The East India Companie haueinge caused certaine 
Iron Ordinance to be made readie for their shipps 
now abuildinge at Deptford, hane not as yett any 
Convenient place for the stowadge thereof. Wherefore I hartelie 
pray yo u to affoorde them soe much favo r as to giue yo r order that 
the said Iron Ordinance may be suffered to be laid on his Ma*f 

1 " Itt is ordered that a Ire be writt to the Justices at Crayford to deale w th the 
" twoe Carpenters gone away, accordinge to the statute in that case prouided, as by 
" Register of Lres at lardge appereth." (Court Minutes, 25t.h September, 1609.) 

2 " And further yt is ordered That a Ire be writt to S r Robert Mansfeild for leaue 
" to lay the Iron Ordinance on the kinges Wharffe at Debtford as at lardge in the 
" Register Appeareth," (Court Minutes, 25th September, 1609.) 

X I 




3 o8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Wharfe at Deptford there to remaine for some shorte space vntill 
the Shipps be lanched. The w* b yo r favo r the Companie will be 
readie to requite in the best manner they May: And I remaine 

Yo 1 very loueinge freinde 

London the 25"' of Tho: Smyth: 

Septemfc 1609, 



HEIS 1 are to Certifie all those whome yt may Concerne 
That we the Gou r no r and Companie of the Marchauntf 
of London tradinge into the East Indies haue 
appointed the Bearer hereof Barber w th all 

expedicon to make his repaier abourd o r Shipp called the Dragon 
latelie come from the Indies, and there to 

A Commission to r i 11 r 

mr Barber to see that remayne to foresee and vse all meanes for 

nothinge be carried ^ . 

out of the Dragon prevencon that noe good? of what kinde soever be 
conveyed or carried out of the said Shipp w th out 
the warrant of the Gou r no r of the said Company in writeinge 
accordinge to the Teno r of a ire from the Lo : highe Thfer of 
England, whearevnto we doe authorize him by this o r Comission. 
In witnes whereof I the Gou r no r of the said Companie haue 
hearevnto sett my hand the 15 th of Nouember 1609. 

Tho : Smyth. 



London the of March i6og. 2 

[LBEYT we haue receiued noe ires from yo n , nor yo r 
Generall since yo r depture, nor otherwyse heard from 
yo", but by some vncertaine reportf from Cairo, 
whereby wee vnderstand yo n haue traded at Mocho 
neere Aden, both in sellinge o r English and buyinge those 

1 The arrival of the Dragon at Plymouth (in the Third Voyage) was announced at 
the Court held 25th September, 1609, but she was in so bad a state that it was the 
1 5th of November before her arrival in the Downs was reported ; " wherevpon yt was 
" ordered that m r Barber doe w th all expedicon retourne againe to the Dragon w th 
" Comission to foresee and prevent that noe kinde of Commodities be Conveyed out 
" of her &c : as by the same Comission appereth." (Court Minutes.) 

2 A letter to the factors of the Fourth Voyage, sent by the ships of the Sixth Voyage, 
under Sir Henry Middleton. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 309 

Country Comodities, whereof we hope yo u haue 
^y ^ e Carivan of Aleppo, and by the way of 
Cairo written vnto vs as alsoe haue sent lohn 
and others. lourden overland accordinge to yo r Comission, 1 
w ch yf yo u haue neglected yo u are worthy much blame, for 
yt may much preiudice the Company, and be the occasion 
of yo r owne wauntf , for that we knowe not whither to direct 
either shippinge or tres vnto yo u : yett such is the care we 
haue of yo r good that haueinge now sent out three Ships to say 
the Tradesincrease of 1000 Tuns, 2 the Pepp Come of 240 Tuns 
and the Little Darlynge of 100 Tuns whereof is Admirall S r 
Henrie Middleton 3 and m r Lawrence ffeemell 4 principall ffacto r : 
we haue not onelie by them sent yo u theis tres but alsoe haue 
giuen them chardge in their Comission, that wheresoever they 
shall finde any of yo u they shewe you all loue and kindnes whereof 
we doubt not. 

Our pleasure therefore is that all such stocke as is (for o r 
accompt of the fourth voyadge) in all or any of yo r Custodies or 
w ch you may receiue, yo u doe as M r ffemell shall aduise yo u (yf 
already yo u haue not) speedilie tourne into such Comodities as 
are best and most profitable for theis partf, and w ch will take 
least bulke, as good rawe silke, fine booke Callicoes yf they be 
cheepe, rich Indico, good druggf , cloues, or maces well chosen 
for we must pay freight for them to the accompt of the Sixt 
voyadge, yett doe we not soe tye yo u to the saveinge of freight 
but that yo u should send such Comodities whereof alsoe wee may 
make most promtt, & the same to packe vpp very safe from 
wettinge markeinge them both vpon the Inner & outer surplus 
w th a distincte marke & n: whereby the same may be distin- 
guished from goodf of any other voyadge. 

1 See page 245. 

2 Said to have been the largest merchant ship up to that time built in England. 
8 See page 46, note 3. 

4 Proposed for "general" in the Fourth Voyage, but "spared" until the next 
expedition. On i3th Nov., 1609, he was appointed a factor for the Sixth Voyage at a 
salary of zool. per annum, with the stipulation that he should remain in the Indies 
at least three years. He died suddenly, 2gth May, 1611, at Mocha, of poison, 
admini stered, as was thought, by the Aga, whom he had threatened to report at 
Const antinople. 



3 io FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

And Concerninge yo r selues whether yo u shall stay in those 
partf or not, we haue referred that vnto S r Henry Middleton 
M r ffemell and Captaine Hawkins to deale w th yo u vpon 
tearmes of stayinge and to contynue the same wages w ch we 
formerlie agreed w th yo u for, that soe the chardge of soe many 
as shall there remaine may be put to the accompt of this Sixt 
voyadge, and the rest to come home in the first Shipp that 
retourneth for England. Yo u shall alsoe vnderstand that in 
this Sixt voyadge we giue o r ffacto re , noe liberty for any priuate 
trade but for soe much as they putt into the generall stocke, 
wee are contented to accept thereof bindinge them from priuate 
tramque directly or indirectlie, and for such wages as we are 
agreed vpon, they or their Assignes shall yearlie receiue the same 
in England, soe that they are not to receiue any wages in the 
Indies, exceptinge onlie some x u yearelie to buy them apprell, 
and that to be paid them in Ryalls of 8 at 5 s p peece w ch we 
knowe to be a reasonable rate consideringe they cost us here 
4 s 6 d p Ryall besidf the venture and forbearance. 

Now therefore soe many of yo u as shall be elected to stay 
there and shall be contented w th theis Condicons, giueinge Bond 
for the true pformance thereof shall be assured to haue yo r wages 
according to agreement. 

And because yo u had some liberty granted by the fourth 
voyadge to adventure some small matter in priuate we are 
content that such as stay behinde as ffacto rs (in payinge freight) 
shall send home such stocke as they haue gathered, vnto m r 
Governo 1 and Company w ch shall be sould for their most 
aduantage, and yf they shall desyre the proceed^ thereof to be 
sent backe in the generall stocke, their request therein shall be 
pformed, but hencforth noe priuate adventure to any ffacto r will 
be pmitted. 

And yf any of you dislike of the restrainte of yo r priuate trade, 
wee haue giuen order that yo u may retourne in theis Shipps : but 
yf you shall be willinge to stay, yo u may expect the Company will 
noe lesse Consider of yo r deserueinges then yo r care and 
diligence shall giue them iust occasion, for hitherto they haue 
never beene vngratefull vnto any that haue well deserued. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 3" 

London the of March I6O9. 1 

[FORASMUCH as since yo r depture we haue receiued 
noe ires from yo u , nor M r Rowles and yett haue hard 
by ires written from Cairo home (thoughe vncertaine 
intelligence) that yo u haue had good traffique at 
Mocho both in sellinge o r English Comodities and byinge Indico 
and other m r chandize whereof we hope (though 
S Rwif s harpey & we haue not receiued them) yo u haue written tres 
by the Carivans and sent lohn lourden over land 
according to yo r Comission, w ch yf yo u haue not done will argue 
greate remisnes & may not onlie greatelie hinder the Company, but 
alsoe discouradge such ffacto rs as yo u haue lefte in those partf , 
for want of supplies Wherefore we haue by S r Henry Middleton 
Generall of this o r sixt voyadge not onlie written theis few lines 
vnto yo u but alsoe by him sent tres vnto any such ffactory as yo u 
may in any place haue planted prayinge yf by the prouidence of 
God yo u shall meete together that vpon receipt of this o r tre yo u 
would relate vnto S r Hen : Middleton, [or] his viceadmirall one 
m r ffeemell the whole proceedinge of yo r voyadge and to aduise 
him where yo u haue traded, where yo u finde least danger, & 
most apparance of proffitt, As alsoe yf yo u haue lefte any of o r 
stocke behinde, where, and at whose handf yt may be demanded 
to thend he may accordinge to order giuen him send or bringe 
home the same when he retourneth. 

ffurther we desier yo u to assist him and m r Lawrance ffeemell 
w th yo r best advice not onlie w ch of those ffacto rs yo r selfe haue 
placed in that Country, but alsoe w ch amongst all the ffacto 1 " 8 that 
wee haue either at Aden, Suratt, Bantam, or ells where w <h 
whome yo u may haue conversed are the fittest men to be ymployed 
in o r service both in reguard of their honest carriadge, and suffi- 
cient knowledge of that Country Comodities. 



A corresponding letter to the Commanders of the Fourth Voyage, 



3 I2 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 




London y e ig th of March. 1609. 

|Y the Dragon w ch God be praysed arryved at Plymouth 
the middle of Septemti last we receiued tres twoe from 
yo 11 lohn Hearne one from Rofet Browne one from 
lohn Sarys & one from Henry Sydall: By lohn 
Hearnes tre the third of Septemb we haue aduise what pepp, 
lohn Hearne Alloes, white Benyamin and silke was sent for o r 

5enryl y Zii e accompt all w ch we haue receiued by Godf favo r 

althoughe the Ship was very leakye and came 
weaklie home, in soe yll case as that we durst scarce adventure her 
(after she was lightened aboue 100 Tonns [)] to come for London 
notw tb standinge we finde avery greate want of the pepp yo u write 
was put abourd, to the full want as yt appeth to vs to be, Aboue 
twentie Tuns each Tun cont 2000 waight i 1 w ch seemeth the more 
strange vnto vs in that the pepp yo u laded at Bantam had lyen 
soe longe and dryed soe much, that of 7489 sackf, there was lost 
238 there, all w ch Considered together maketh vs thinke that o r 
busines was not well husbanded neither w th yo u nor in the Shipp 
comeinge home: Therefore we pray yo 11 that hereafter nothinge 
be bought nor sould privatelie but that yo r lournall or booke 
Couch ant may contynually lay open for eu r y one that is o r ffacto r 
to looke vpon, for wee hould yt noe way ntt, that he that is o r 
cheefe ffacto r , should carrie all the accomptf close to him selfe in 
such sorte that those whoe are w th him can giue noe reason howe 
o r Comodities are lessened, guiftf given, nor howe the wantf doe 
happen as some of yo r selues haue written vnto vs in theis yo r 
ires, that yo u can yeald vs noe reason w ch way the foresaid 238 
baggf of pepp should be lost : 

We are sorry that there hath not beene a Contynuall booke 
kept there that we might thereby haue discerned in good sorte 
howe o r busines hath beene carried, ffor we are giuen to vnder- 
stand that m r Scott brought away his owne accomptf as alsoe 
m r Towerson did the lyke and lefte noe Coppies of them w th yo u . 
It had beene fittinge for such as are the Companies servant^ to 
haue kept a booke for the Company, there to haue remaned, and 
haue brought home a Coppy thereof for their owne vse, or at least 
so much thereof as might concerne them, ffor an amendm* 

1 i.e. twenty hundredweight. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 313 

whereof we haue sent yo u a lardge booke to be a Contynuall 
Couchant soe longe as yt shall last, willinge yo u the principall 
ffacto r and those that shall succeede yo u , that from hencforth yo u 
suffer those that are facto w th yo u to be priuie to all thingf 
bought and sould or otherwyse to be disposed of As alsoe that 
yo r bookf and accomptc may be publique and comon to all the 
rest of o r ffacto", w ch shall be good for yo r selfe to avoyed scandall 
or suspicon : And will be alsoe agood informacon vnto the rest 
of the ffacto" vnder yo u , and bringe contentm* vnto vs, to free vs 
from suspicon of any practizes when yo u shall carry yo r busines 
publiquelie. 

Wee write vnto yo u twoe yeares past by the Assencon and 
Vnion as alsoe by the Expedicon, Captaine, David Middleton, the 
Coppies of w ch Ires we doe herew th all send yo 11 . 1 

Albeyt we haue heretofore suffered yo u to haue private trade, 
yett the Company hath now vpon speciall consideracon resolued, 
Not to pmitt yt any longer, for that we finde that those whoe haue 
had the manadgeinge of o r busines, haue had more care to inrich 
them selues, then to seeke o r proffitt, for yf they had not soe done 
they might haue ymployed o r stocke (w ch they haue had in their 
handf since S r lames Lancaster came from thence) soe as the 
benefitt thereof might haue borne the chardges of o r howse at 
Bantam at the least. 

We wrote vuto yo u by Captaine David Middleton that yo u 
should noe more pay yo r selues yo r wages by Royalls of 8 at iiij 8 
the peece but att such a moderate rate, as might be indifferent: 2 
yett now vpon better consideracon the Company haue concluded, 
and giue yo u direct order to pay noe more wages at all there, 
then may be needfull for the comelie apprellinge of any of o r 
ffacto r8 w ch we deeme to be x u or 20 m r kf at the most p Annu and 
the rest to be paid here in England, either to be adventured in 
the generall stocke or to such of yo r freindf , as yo u shall assigne 
the Company to pay yt vnto. And w th all such wages as yo u shall 
pay to lett the Ryall of 8 for fyve shilling^. 

Alsoe we signifie vnto yo u all, that althoughe any of yo u shall 

1 See pages 236 and 285. 

2 Fair to both sides, just ; cp. the prayer in English Church Liturgy that those in 
authority " may truly and indifferently minister justice." 



3 i 4 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

succeede such as were before yo u in place yett there shall be noe 
succession of increase of wages allowed vnto yo u except yt be by 
spetiall order & direccon from the Governo 1 " and Company. Wee 
haue appointed S r Henry Middleton to be o r Generall, vnto 
whome we wish yo u to shewe yo r selues obedient, and to doe as 
he shall ymploy yo u whether yt be by tarieinge there, or goeinge to 
any other place whether he shall see occasion to carry yo u . 

Althoughe we had giuen order heretofore that noe man 
should bringe home any goodf in o r Shipps of the nature and 
kinde that we o r selues doe lade, yett the greatest nomber in the 
Dragon brought home store of pepp, w ch causeth vs to thinke 
that the same was stolne from vs and occasioned the want we 
found of o r pepp in the said Shipp. ffor prevencon whereof here- 
after we haue reiterated the same Comandement, and wish eu r y 
one of yo u that shall either be at the cleiringe of any of o r Shipps 
away from thence, or come home in any of them, that yo u see 
and make diligent inquirie amongst the Company of the said 
Shipp publiquelie, whether any of them haue any goodf of such 
kinde yea or noe. yf they haue and can make due proofe that 
they bought yt there, then yo u are to pay them for yt & shoote 
yt into the hould : yf they haue none signifie soe much vnto 
vs, that they denied to haue any there. 

We haue alsoe taken order, that whosoeu r shall lade any 
goodf in o r Shipps and shall not register the same w th the Pursar 
shall haue yt taken from him. And we requier eu r y one of yo u to 
doe yo r best that the same may be dulie pformed. 

We will doe o r best endevo rs to prevent that none such as 
S r Edward Michelborne was, should disturbe yo r quiett whoe 
dyed a yeare since hopinge that tyme will weare out the 
remembrance of his deedf . 

{forasmuch as we haue found greate inconvenyence by lettinge 
of yo r money there at 2 or 3 for one to be paid heare, whereby 
diu r s of the Mariners and their wyues and Children after their 
deathes haue beene ympou r ished we doe therefore thinke yt fitt, 
that noe such Exchandge be suffered or pmitted for the avoidinge 
of scandall both from yo u and vs. 

It appeth by the Accomptf sent home that yo u haue drawne 
yo r wages after iiij 8 the Ryall of 8 from the first of October 1605 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 315 

to the 3i th of October 1608, w ch being accompted after iiij 8 vj d the 
Ryall as yt costeth vs besidf the adventure we finde you haue 
allowed yo r selues 470 Ryalls of 8 more then is yo r due w ch we 
expect to haue restored by yo u that haue receiued the same, as 
alsoe that from the 3i th of Octofc 1608 yo u receiue the Ryall of 8 
at 5 s and not otherwyse. 

Thomas Harwood the Gunner of the Dragon giueth vs in 
accompt 20 barrells of powlder lefte w th yo u lohn Hearne, whereof 
as of all thingf ells lefte vnder yo r chardge we expect a good 
accompt. 

There is one W m : Lanwell lefte at Bantam whoe standeth 
indebted in the Pursars booke of the Dragon iij 11 iiij 8 x d w ch yo u 
are to defaulke out of his wages there and make the Company 
Creditor for the same. 



London the 15 th of March 1609. 

|UR harty Comendacons remembred &c: yo r ires of the 
fourth of Octofo iGoS 1 we receiued p Moloneux m r of 
the Dragon whoe by Godf assistaunce aryued saffelie 
at Plymouth in Septenib last being 1609 subscribed by 
W m : Hawkins and W m : ffinche, together w th a note from W m : 
ffinche of wares aswell there to be bought as 

To mr Hawkins and . ^ 

the re^t of or ffactoi* sould w th waightf measures valuacons of moneys 
& other .pticular intelligences to good purpose 
and w ch we cannot but Comend wishinge the lyke carefullnes 
to be contynued in yo u all. Wee vnderstand of yo r saffe 
arriuall at the Barr of Suratt and of landinge yo r goodf, 
together w th that vnhappie surprize of yo r men & good? by the 
Portugalls, 2 we doe vnderstand alsoe of the season of the yeare 
and of the depthes of o r Shipps for that place, of all w ch aduise 
we doubt not but to make good vse hereafter. Yett we cannot 
but blame yo u , for sendinge so much good? and moneys a shore, 
before yo u had bought or laden any goodf backe againe, and alsoe 
for adventuringe the ymploym* of all yo r moneys in one bote, yt 

1 Not now extant. " See page 219, note. 




3 i6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

beinge the first that yo u sent from the shore to the Shipp, whereas 
yf you had sent lesse at once w th good caution, yo u might haue 
prevented o r losses of goodf and men in greate measure yf not 
altogether, And howsoeu r yo u excuse yt, that yo r men were 
fainte hearted and yealded w tll out resistaunce, yett we are 
informed by Bucke and Marlowe now prisoners in Lisbone that 
they were destitute of powder and other meanes to defend them 
selues, w ch was a greate neglect in yo u to be soe secure, 1 as not 
to arme and animate yo r men thorowlie, beinge in the Middest of 
dangers, and comittinge soe much goodf to their chardge, we are 
informed by some of the Dragons Company that yo u had sould 
much of yo r lead and other english Comodities at Suratt, but 
in your ires yo u mention onlie the disbursem^ of all yo r monie, 
yo u write vs alsoe of greate Elaphauntf teeth bought by the way 
but not what they cost, such thingf yo u doe not well to omytt we 
hope that o r twoe shipps that we sett out hence in April 1608 . 
the Vnion and the Assencbn haue visited yo u as we gaue them 
Comission, And that by makeinge saile of yo r english Comodities 
yo u did furnish yo r selues w th Indico & other Cambaia goodf in 
due tyme, yo u giue vs good incourradgm* touchinge the easinesse 
and the greate benefitt of placeinge a factory in Suratt and other 
places neare Cambaia, w ch we alwaies soe conceaued, & cheeflie 
aymed at yt, to w ch end besidf all other meanes wherew th we did 
furnishe yo u thether we gaue yo u direccons, tres, and presentf, 
wherew th soe soone as you should be landed to addresse yo r selues 
to visitt the greate Magoll, that by his proteccon yo r residence 
and ffactory at Suratt, might be more safelie setled before any 
further violence or treacherie of the Portugalls plottinge there, 
might be put in execucon against yo u , w ch we greatlie feare yo u 
did not hasten to prevent, till yt was too late, neither can we 
gather by yo r tres that yo u did land any of yo r present^ for the 
kinge, and therefore we cannot but feare that yo r interteynem* 
w th him will be accordinglie, and moreover in that spetiall other 
Cawtion w ch we gaue you to beware and not to trust the 
Portugalls, we finde to o r Coste that yo u were too carelesse, all 
w ch Considered thoughe we hope the best, yett we cannott but 

1 Unsuspecting. It was in his " secure hour " that Hamlet's father was murdered. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 317 

rest very doubtfull both of yo r saffetie and of o r goodf , till wee doe 
heare further, we haue furnished in theis shipps for Suratt 
Elaphatmtf teeth, Quicksylver, and other Marchandize, for w ch 
yo u gaue vs aduise, and whereof the Cape Marchaunt M r ffemell 
hath the Invoices, w th the sales whereof, as alsoe with his direo 
cons what to send ffor England, he is to make yo u acquainted, 
& therein we requier yo u to assist him w th all dilligence, and w th 
yo r best endevo ra . Those base thingf as sweete fennell seedf, 
Cufnyn, longe pepp, and such lyke as are not worth the fraight, 
we doe not expect nor doe wishe yo u to send any: we haue 
resolued and doe thinke yt fitt M r Hawkins, that yo u doe in 
the first of theis three shipps retourne for England w th yo r 
accounte lournall, and such other yo r obseruacons touchinge 
the affaires of those Countries, that by yo r intelligence we may 
be the better directed in o r further proceedinge to settle in those 
partf, and in any hand we giue yo u straight chardge to foresee 
and prevent that the Mariners nor any other be suffered to pester 
the Shipps w th luggage, w ch abuse had well neare beene the losse 
of the Dragon in hir nowe comeinge home, beinge pestred for 
want of gou r nm* (eu r y man doeinge what he listed) w th at least 
one hundred Tuns of Mariners goodf more then her burthen. 

And forasmuch as we haue heretofore found that the priuate 
trade of our ffacto rs hath beene carefully carryed for their owne 
Lucar and gaine w th the greate neglect of o rs , conuertinge all the 
ritche & pretious things to their owne vse & nothinge for the 
Company but pepp and grosse Comodities, and seeing theis three 
shipps in this Sixt voyadge, are the begynninge of a new 
accoumpte, we haue ordered that nowe and hencforth neither o r 
Generalls Marchantf ffacto 1 " 3 , nor any other that we ymploye shall 
be pmitted any pryvate dealeinge or trade for them selues and 
therefore S r Hen : Middleton himselfe, M r ffemale and all the rest 
that are now ymployed in this shippinge haue putt their moneys 
into the generall stocke, and haue giuen their seu r all Bondf w th 
suerties as them selues can witnesse not onelie to forbeare all 
priuate trade directlie or indirectlie for them selues, but alsoe to 
forbid and hinder all others from the lyke, and therefore soe many 
of yo u of the third voyadge as are now there resident, or shall be 
lefte there to Contynew still, notw th standinge any lifctie of priuate 



3 i8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

trade much or little admitted vnto yo u in the said third voyadge & 
seeinge this voyadge is the begynninge of a new account wherein 
we intend to carry an even and equall hand to all that we ymploy, 
we doe therefore lett yo u knowe that you are hencforth to 
forbeare all priuate tradinge for yo r selues, & to ymploy yo r selues 
onlie and whollie for the generall stocke giueing bond? to S r 
Henry, M r Downton 1 or M r ffemale to the Companies vse for the 
true pformance thereof, onlie for apparrell and such vses yo u are 
to take of yo r wages soe much as will suffice soe yt exceed not 
x u p Annu accounteinge the Ryall of 8 at 5 s , and the rest of yo r 
wages to be paid yo u in England, neyther hath the Generall or 
Cape Marchant any authoritie or power to augment wages w th any 
of yo u but we haue power to gratifie any man that we shall thinke 
to deserue the same, w ch may be sufficient incourradgm* to styrr 
vp your best endevo 1 " 8 in o r seruice. And we haue giuen order to 
displace and bringe home all such as by their refusall shall shewe 
them selues to be otherwyse disposed then in o r Comission we 
haue ordayned. And towchinge S r Edward Michelborne (whoe is 
dead almost a yeare since) howsoeu 1 we suspected him to haue 
gotten his goodf by wrongfull courses yet we knowe not in 
pticular whome he had wronged. Therefore as yett we can say 
nothinge to that matter in as much as we receiued not the 
Captaines tres w ch you mention were taken by the Portugalls, that 
he had directed to o r kinge complaineinge of his losses And thus 
wfshinge yo r prosperyty and good successe we Comitt yo u to God 
and rest. 



1 Nicholas Downton was the lieutenant general of the Sixth Voyage, and had 
charge of the Peppercorn, with which he returned in safety, though in sore plight, in 
the autumn of 1613. In the following spring he sailed again, in the New Year's Gift, 
in command of a voyage on account of the First Joint Stock. At Surat he had to 
sustain a formidable attack from a Portuguese fleet, but successfully repulsed them. 
He next proceeded to Bantam, which was reached in June, 1615 ; and here he died 
on the 6th August, "death lying in ambush to intrap," says Purchas, "whom by 
" open force he could not deuoure," 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 319 

Instruccons 1 giuen by vs the Gou r no r & Comittees 
for the Company of Marchauntf tradinge [into] the East 
Indies vnto Lawrence ffemale our principall ffacto r and 
the rest of o r ifactors now ymployed in this sixt voyadge. 




forasmuch as in o r generall Comission we 
haue largelie sett downe what we haue thought 
necessary to be obserued in o r generall busines and 
doe herew th deliver yo u a Coppy thereof praying yo u 
as much as in yo u lieth to obserue the content^ thereof, we 
haue thought yt fitt onlie 2 for yo r pticulare direccons to recomend 
to yo r Consideracon this o r aduise followinge 

2 And because we haue beene pswaded to appointe and 
nominate yo u o r principall and cheefe ffacto r in this voyadge out of 
the good reportf of diners yo r freindf and o r owne opinion of yo r 
honest behavio r And the hope of yo r instruccious endevo r and 
skilfull experience in the manadgeing the affaires of m r chandize of 
soe greate ymportance as yo u knowe theis to be, we wish yo u that 
wheresoeu r yo u shall come or settle a ffactory, to inquier and 
informe yo r selfe sufficiently of the Condicons and manners of the 
people, and gou r nm t and what Comodity we may send from 
hence most vendable in those pt, Espetially concerninge wollen 
Comodities, and other the natiue Comodities of o r owne Country 
whereby we may be able to dryue a trade w th out the transportacon 
of money w ch is the cheefe scope of o r desires And of those sort 
of Comodities aswell wollen as others the quallity quantity culler 
and price And of Cloth whether highe shorne or lowe, strayned 
or vnstrayned, And in lyke sorte to aduise of all other Comodi- 
ties what yo u shall imagine needfull for o r further direccons. 

3 Alsoe wee desier to vnderstand what comodity yo u finde 
there w ch may bee vented to proffitt here or any other place 
wherevnto o r ships shall nauigate in this or in any other 
succeedinge voyadge. As alsoe what trade those people haue w th 
other nations either remote or neare confineinge vnto 3 them, 

1 There is another copy of this document among the Marine Records at the India 
Office (marked C i). The two have been carefully compared, and differences of any 
importance noted. 

3 " Wee haue only thought it fit for" &c. (Mar. Rec. copy). 

3 Bordering upon. 



320 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

And wherein there traffique espetially consist^ together w th the 
valuacon of their coynes, Their seu r all weight^ and measures 
and what other occurrence needfull for vs to knowe, and thereof 
to endevo r by all possible meanes to giue vs intelligence overland, 
as by the way of the red sea to Cairo directing yo r ires to the 
ffrench Consull there Resident, To be sent to Mercellus 1 inclosed 
to Henery Berry or any other Englishman there Resident, Alsoe 
by the Persian gulfe by any Carauan throughe Persia either bound 
for Constantinople, Aleppo, or Tripole directing yo r tres to the 
ymbassado r or Consull there resident to be Conveyed vnto vs, 
As alsoe by the Caspyan Sea throughe Muscovia vnto the English 
Agent there beinge, To w ch purpose we giue yo u an Alphabett of 
Characters wherein we wish yo u to write for more secrecy. 

4 Yf yo u should touche at Aden or Machowe 2 in the red sea 
beinge in yo r way before yo u come at Suratte we wish yo u to 
inquier whether those of the fourth voyadge haue not setled a 
factory theare, yf they haue wee desier that they may receiue 
such comforte from yo u as yo u may Conveniently afford them 
and acquainte them of the intelligence we haue had by other 
mens tres of o r ships beinge at Machowe, and of the bartringe 
for Indico, But not haueinge any Ires from them, w ch as they 
knowe wee gaue them in spetiall chardge & to that purpose sent 
one or twoe to be sent from Aden overland, wee are ignorant 
whether there be any incourradgm* to maintaine trade in those 
partf, But yf by their tres or by any other meanes we shall 
vnderstand any hope of good trade, Althoughe yt be but for vent 
of o r english Comodities onelie we shall not omitt to frequent 
those portf 3 w th o r next shippinge, In the meane tyme yf yo u 
may put of in any reasonable sorte either for syluer or gould, any 
of the Comodities we now send we wishe the same to be done as 
more att large in o r generall Comission is expressed. 

5 Att yo r comeing to Suratt informe yo r selfe whether m r W m : 
Hawkins or any other before yo r arriuall haue setled Capitulacons 
w th the greate Magoule of that Country fitt and safe for o r quiett 
trade into his Territorie & yf the same be not done in such 
sufficient manner as yo u deeme expedient, Then wee wishe yo u in 

1 Marseilles. 3 Partes (Mar. Rec. copy). 

3 Mocha. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 3 ai 

the meane tyme to procure such safe Conducte from the kinge of 
Cambaia, & the other cheefe Officers of that Country as may 
incourrage yo 11 to negotiate amongst them And w th all convenient 
expedicon to dispeede o r Ships from thence, accordinge as in o r 
Comission generall we haue att lardge directed yo 11 And that 
done then yo u may in comely sorte accompanied w th such others 
of o r ffacto rs as yo u shall thinke fitt, repair vnto the Courte of the 
greate Magull to establish further Capitulacon for o r peaceable 
trade either at Suratt or any other porte or porte, place or places 
w th in any of his dominions alwaies remembringe the hono r of o r 
kinge and Country & the reputacons of o r negotiacons in those 
partf & for the greater dignity of yo r ymploym* vnto him we 
haue pcured his Ma ties tre vnto the Magull, the originall & Coppy 
whereof we deliu 1 ' yo u wishinge that the deliu r y thereof may be 
w th that hono 1 ' that may be well fittinge soe greate a Monarche, & 
as the oportunity of the place & other yo 1 ' Convenience in those 
pte shall pmitt accompanyinge some honorable present of veluett 
Plate or whate ells more acceptable both vnto the greate Magull 
& some spetiall men aboute him as in yo r good discreecon shall 
seeme meete. 

6 And for yo r better instruccons we doe herew th deliu r yo u the 
Coppy of such priuiledgf as S r lames Lancaster obtayned from 
the kinge of Achine wherevnto yo u may ad or diminishe as 
occasion offereth & the lyke Coppy we haue formerly deliu r ed 
to those of the third and fourth voyadge. 

7 ffurther we wish yo 11 diligently to in forme yo r selfe whether 
we may not settle a ffactory at Dabull neare Suratt or Negratittf 1 
in the Ryver of Syndus or in any other porte towne, where o r 
shippinge may not be subiect to bard 2 hauens as at Suratt nor in 
soe greate danger of the Portugalls And where we may aswell 
vent o r Comodities and make retornes in the Comodities of those 
Countries at reasonable ratf . 

8 Alsoe inquier as much as yo u can of the depth, breadth, 
Ebbs, flowingf, Currantf & sholes of the portf & havens there- 
aboutf & what the chardge of transportacon of Comodytie from 
porte to porte will cost by land as by Sea and whatt customes & 

1 See page 252, note. 8 Barred. 



S 22 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

duties are payable at each porte aswell for goodf and money as 
ancoradge of shippinge &c: 

9 If any Comodities either of the fourth voyadge shall be 
prouided at Aden or of the third or fourth voyadge at Suratt or 
any other poorte wherevnto yo r shippinge shall arriue w ch are to 
be sent for England we wish yo u to suffer the same to be laden 
abourd theis o r shipps vnder seu r all markf aswell w th in the 
Canvas or other Cou r ture asw th out for the better discou r y thereof, 
And that there be pticular Invoices & bills of ladeinge of all 
the seu r all pcells that shall be laden for each accounte for 
avoydeinge Confusion in theis pticular accomptf alsoe yf any 
remainders shall be lefte & deliu r ed over vnto yo u we would haue 
a true and pfect Inventory thereof kept in a booke Couchant, 
wherein we will that all busines, either for buyinge sellinge 
bartringe exchandging shippinge receaueingf transportacons and 
what ells needfull to be registred conc r ninge o r busines and yo r 
ymploym* be from tyme to tyme dulie trulie and fairelie kept and 
written and a true coppy thereof sent vs by eu r y shippinge both 
vnderwritten by o r cheefe Agent as alsoe by fower or fyue of 
those o r ffacto w ch are in principall places of ymploym* vnder 
him. 

10 And for the better passinge of yo r busines wheresoeu r yo u 
recide we thinke yt fitt & soe requier that yo u appointe out of the 
best quallified amongst those ffacto ra w ch are vnder yo r go^nm* 
One whoe [shall] keepe bookf faire written, aswell lournall as 
lidger after the order of Debitor & Credito r of all o r busines there 
passed, and alsoe that some other there vnto most apt may be 
appointed Casheare to receiue and pay keepinge a Cashe booke 
very faire written w th out blottinge scrapeinge or interlyneinge and 
alsoe that yo u doe appointe eu r y other ffacto r in such other Offices 
and places as they are best capeable w th this Caution that yo u doe 
weekelie or oftener if be soe requisite call them to render a 
reason and giue accompte of their seu r all chardge and accordinge 
to their behavio" & good pformance thereof either to contynew 
them in their chardge or to displace them w th such reprehension as 
yo u thinke needfull. 

11 And because there is noe meanes more prevalent to 
strengthen and Confirme the waies of the godlie in righteousnes 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 323 

then the spiritt of God w ch is the guide vnto all good motions, 1 
and noe ayde more pregnant to support and vphould the sine? 
from fallinge into wickednes then the grace of God w ch preserueth 
in all good workf and that almighty god out of his Mercy in 
Ihesus Christe hath promysed not onlie to here vs when we 
call vpon him, but alsoe to graunte vs his spiritt of grace to 
strengthen and assiste vs in all accons w ch Sathan or the world 
can inforce against vs, wee exhorte yo u in the feare of god to be 
very carefull to assemble together yo r whole familie eu r y morninge 
and eveninge And to loyne together in all humility w th harty 
prayer to almighty god for his m r cifull proteccon and favo r to yo u 
in all yo r proceeding^ and for all other his graces needfull for a 
true Christian to desier. 

12 And for that Ciuell behauio r is very Requisite for the 
begettinge of Icue and estimacon amongst those heathenishe 
people we pray yo u to settle such modest and sober governm* 
in yo r houshould that neyther amongst themselues there bee 
contentious quarrells or other occasions of strife w ch may tend to 
the preiudice of o r affaires and be a scandull to o r profession and 
religion, As alsoe that none of yo r people giue iust cause to any 
stranger to Complaine of their misdemeano 18 . 

13 And because we desier the hono r of o r kinge and the 
reputacon of o r traffique amongst them we wishe yo u to comporte 
yo r selfe, both in yo r habitt and howse keepinge in such comelie 
and convenient manner as neyther may disparadge o r busines nor 
be accompted too excessiue in expences. 

14 And for that we imagine yf yo u settle at Surate yo u shall 
not soe speedilie finde dispacth of all the Comodities wee haue 
appointed to be there landed, but that there will be a greate parte 
thereof lefte to sell after the denture of o r Shipps from thence. 
Wee pray yo u to advance the price thereof to the vttermost, for 
by settinge a good estimacon of o r Comodities at the firste, we 
shall be the better able to Contynue the same heereafter w ch may 
well be done when we haue the trade onlie w th them. 

15 And for that o r stocke remaineinge behinde in yo r handf 
may be of some good value, we would haue yo u to prouide some 



1 Acctions (Mar, Rec. copy). 

Y I 



324 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



speciall Comodities at the best tyme of their cheepnes as yo n 
knowe are most vendible in England & the same to haue in a 
readines againste o r next shippinge, w ch God willinge yf we haue 
incourradgm 1 shall be yearelie. 

16. And for that yo u shall not alwaies finde such Comodities 
as yo u desier, but may haue money lyinge in Chest, We expect 
yo n will make such proffitt thereof, either by ymploym* in 
Comodities to Resell at dearer markettf : l or otherwyse as the 
trafficke of that Country shall afford, and soe as yo u may doe the 
same w th saffetie, And not to be prevented when yo" shall haue 
occasion to vse the same for to prouide Comodity for o r purpose 
herein wee must depend principally vpon yo r piouidence & 
profitable reguard to o r affaires. 

17 And for that there be many ffacto rs abroad dispersed as 
wee Imagine in sundry places w ch haue beene sent out by the 
Adventurers aswell of the third voyadge as of the fourth, Wee 
will that yf yo" finde any of them in those places, wherevnto yo u 
shall come, w ch are more fittinge to remaine there, Then those 
that now goe in theis Shipps, That then yo n doe Contynewe them 
in such chardge as yo 11 thinke fittinge. Prouided that they are 
to expect noe increase of wages, other then what was formerlie 
agreed w th them here in England, As alsoe that they are not to 
requier 2 their wages any more in the Country but here in 
England either at their retourne, or by their appointem* vnto 
their freindf onelie wee are Content to allowe them Tenn poundf 
or xx m r kf p Annu, yf they desier the same to finde them apprell, 
And to be accompted to be receiued after 5 s starlinge for the 
Riall of 8, & not otherwyse. And whereas some fewe of them 
haue beene allowed to trade yearelie for some small stocke, wee 
doe now absolutelie disallowe 3 thereof & will noe longer pmitt 
any of them to exercise any priuate trade whatsoeu r . 

18 And therefore yf any of them shall dislike to contynewe 
there, vpon theis Condicons we wish yo n to send him 4 for 
England w th o 1 ' first shippinge and for that we shall desier to 
vnderstand from m r Hawkins more pticuler adu^icem* of those 
.pties we desier that he may come home in one of theis o r three 

1 Rates (Mar. Rec. copy). 3 Allowe (Mar. Rec. copy), an evident blunder. 

3 Receyue (Mar. Rec. copy). 4 Them (Mar. Rec. copy). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 325 

Shipps, In some convenient manner, respectinge the place we 
sent him forthe. 

19 And althoughe wee knowe yo u are not ignoratmt what yt 
is to deale w th people of faithlesse condicon, yett wee thinke yt 
not amisse to put yo u in mynde to be very carefull to buy of the 
best sorte of eu v y Comodity, & for thingf garbleable to haue them 
made very cleane for otherwyse both Coste, fraight, costome & 
chardge is cleane loste, alsoe lett yo r good be carefully packed 
and faierlie marked both w th in and w th out, and distincte, And 
Invoices pfect sent by eu r y Shipp w th bills of ladeinge and the 
accompte of the Costf and chardgf of every Comoditie in 
m'chantlike order, as alsoe send the Inventory of all goodf 
remaineinge vpon eu r y accompte & the valuacon thereof & keepe 
seuerall 1 accomptf of eu r y voyadge. 

20 Wee vnderstand that in the Persian gulfe vpon the 
Coaste of Arabia over against Ormus there is greate store of 
pearle fished, 3 whereof as of the needfull occurrances we pray yo u 
giue vs intelligence. 

21 When yo u shall repaier to the greate Magull or be other- 
wyse setled in his Countrie w th peaceable trade yo 11 may endevo r 
by the best meanes yo u can either by the Magull or some other 
his cheefe Comanders in his Country to procure what yo u may 
for the restitucon of o r goodf taken by the Portugall from vs w th in 
the streame 3 of Suratt, As alsoe for the release of o 1 ' people at 
Goa, yf the same be not already done, or w th out hope to be 4 
obtayned in yo r Capitulacons at Suratt yo u are amongst others to 
endevo 1 ' to procure to be free from paym* of Customes wholly, 
aswell of goodf as for moneys both inward as outward^ yf yo u 
can obtaine the same. But yf yo 11 can not obtaine the same soe 
generally yet we doubt not but yo 11 shall agree for some reasonable 
Customes vpon goodf onely & that yo r moneys may be free of all 
dutie, of custome & such lyke, and whatsoeu r yo 11 shall agree to 
pay yt may be for such goodf yo 11 shall onlie land at Suratt, 5 & 

1 Omitted in Mar. Rec. copy. 

2 The reference is to the famous pearl fishery of the Bahrein Islands. 

s Streames (May. Rec. copy). For the occurrence referred to, see page 219, note. 

4 To bee donne or obtained (Mar. Rec. copy). 

5 For such goodes onlie as you shall land att Surratt (Mar. Rec. copy). 



326 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

that the rest vnladen 1 may be free thereof, And for that we 
Imagine that the Portugalls will endevo 1 ' by all meanes possible as 
well by forces by Sea, As practises ashore to intercept yo u in yo r 
busines we pray yo u to be watchfull & vigilent to prevent all their 
enterprices against you whatsoeu r . 

22 Wee deliver vnto yo u twoe gould Ring? sett w th Emraules 
being very faire stones the w ch yo u may either giue for present? at 
Suratt, yf yo u see good occasion or otherwyse to sell them for o r 
most advantage. And because nothinge is more c r teine then 
death, and vnc r teine then the tyme thereof, we would willingly 
establishe such a course in the Succession of o r cheefe ffacto r as 
may giue vs good hope of the good accomplishm* of o r affaires 
And take away all occasion of Emulacon from amongst yo u , And 
therefore wee doe resolue and ordeine, that yf yo u m r Lawrence 
ffemell shall happen to depte this lyfe before such tyme as yo u 
shall be settled at Suratt That then lohn ffowler doe succeede 
yo u in yo r place vntill their arriuall thither, And yf he happen to 
die then consequentlie Hughe ffraine, 2 Beniamyn Greene, Robert 
Larkyn, 3 Thomas Glemon, 4 lohn Williams, 5 ffrancis Slany Robert 
Weeb 6 lohn Stoughton & Baylie Ball and W m : Poulter & W m : 
Reynold? to be attendant vpon the cheefe ffacto r whosoeu r , But 
when God shall send yo u lohn ffowler and the rest to Suratt & 
that m r ffemall be depted this lyfe before, Then wee thinke fitt 
that yf either m r W m : Hawkins, or w m ffinche bee there resident 
& liueinge 7 That then m r Hawkins be o r cheefe Agent duringe his 
aboade there, And w m ffinche to succeede him and soe conse- 
quentlie lohn ffowler, Hughe ffraine and the rest accordinge as 
they are by vs heere inrancked, But yf m r ffemalle shall Hue 
vntill his arriuall & settlinge at Suratt or ells where in the East 

1 This seems to be a mistake for " unlanded." Mar. Rec. copy has " unladed." 
3 Engaged as factor, i6th Nov., 1609 ; died at Bantam, apparently in 1613. 

3 Engaged, i5th Jan., 1610, to serve seven years and to adventure ioo/. ; he was 
an active servant of the Company, and for some time was chief of the factory at 
Patani, where he died, lath May, 1616. 

4 Glemham (Mar. Rec. copy). 

5 Engaged, 8th Jan., 1610; died towards the end of 1613, while on a voyage to 
Sukadana. 

6 Apparently an error for Rowland Webb. 

7 Lyeinge (Mar. Rec. copy). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 327 

Indies then o r desier is in case of his death, that he would make 
choise aswell amongst o r other ffacto" there resident as of theis 
we now send, of such a man whoe for his honest conu r sation & 
best vnderstandinge to mannadge soe waightie a busines as this 
chardge is he shall deeme most fitt wishinge herein that noe 
ptiall respect be had of any but the pson most worthiest may be 
appointed to be both o r cheefe Agent and super intendant to the 
rest of o r ffacto rs vnder him straightlie chardgeinge eu r y one of yo u 
that are interteyned in this o r seruice as you tender o r favo rs and 
yo r owne preferm*. That yo u giue due respect of priority aswell 
to o r cheefe Agent as to all other o r ffacto 1 ' 3 vnder him accordinge 
to their degrees and places & that there be noe swellinge ambition 
amongst yo u , Envieinge to giue p r sidency to such as either by o r 
selues o r by o r cheefe Agent shalbe placed before yo u but eu r y one 
in his seu r all place & accordinge to his place to endevo r o r benefitt 
in yo r ymploym* in o r seruice and the mutuall preseruacon of 
Christian loue amongst yo u , And althoughe by accidentall 1 
succession of place may fall vpon some one of yo u whose wages is 
but small yett we will not yeald to any Succession of Sallary or 
increase of wages, but retaine that power in o r selues to reward 
where we shall finde the same convenient, there is one Baylie 
Ball whoe hath beene a houshoulder 2 & reputed an honest man, 
But now content to goe as Steward in the Pepp Corne whose 
name we haue added amongst the rest of o r rTacto rs , for that we 
imaginne he may fitt for better place yf yo u keepe, him in the 
Country w ch we leaue to yo r discrecon. 

23. Iff yo u shall finde in yo r trauaile or can convenience come 
by any rare byrdf 3 or beast f or any other things fitt for vs to 
present to his ma tie : or any of the noble Lordf that are o r honor- 
able freindf we pray and requier yo u to be carefull to prouide and 
send the same w tb espetiall chardge to some carefull man or men 
that retourne to see them carefully kept & deliu r ed to vs. And 
w th all yf yo u shall knowe any of the Mariners or other to haue any 
such w ch yo u can not procure from them for reson then that yo u 
send vs notice thereof to the end we may take order 4 therein 
accordinglie. 

1 Accident (Mar. Rec. copy). 2 Housekeepper (May. Rec. copy). 

3 Anie rare thinges as fine birdes (Mar. Rec. copy). 

4 Other order (Mar. Rec. copy). 



328 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



S r Thomas Smyth 1 
Henry Boothby 
W m Speede 
Edward Langley 
William Reynoldf 
Rowland Webb. 
Beniamyn Greene 
Hughe Greete 
Thomas Glenham 
Robert Larkyn 



ffr: Slany 



Lawrence ffemell 
lohn Williams 
Hughe ffraine 
lohn Stoughton 
George Cockaine 




A Comission 2 sett downe by Vs the Governo r 

Deputy & Comittees for the Marchauntf of London 

tradeinge to the East Indies for better direccon of o r 

loueinge freind S r Henry Middleton Generall the 

da y L of n fMarch e i6o 9 . Leiutenante & others the Marchauntf, M ra : & 

Mariners in this o r intended VI th voyadge [to] 

the East Indies w dl we humblie beseech Almightie God 

to blesse w th a happie Conclucon. 

NPRIMIS whereas wee the Marchauntf abouesaid 
w th o r g r eate chardge & trouble haue p r pared twoe 
shipps and apynnace (to say) the Trades Increase 
Gyles Thornton 3 m r . The Pepper Corne Abraham 

1 The Mar. Rec. copy concludes with 

To this have firmed 
S r Thomas Smith gou r nor 
S r John Wattes Hughe Hamersly 

Robert Bell Robert Middellton 

William Harryson Thomas Stiles 

Robert Ofley 

Of these the copyist of the text has entered only the governor's name; the others 
being copies of the signatures of the factors concerned, appended as an acknowledg- 
ment that they had made themselves acquainted with the instructions contained in 
the document (see page 38, note). 

2 The manuscript in the Marine Records referred to on page 319, note, contains also 
a copy of this document, which has been compared in similar manner with the present 
text, and variations noted. 

1 Died in the voyage, together with his son, and two servants. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 329 

Lawes 1 M r & the little Darlinge William Pemerton M r : for a 
voyadge by Godf grace in them to be made to the East Indies 
[and] haue furnished the same sufficientlie & in plentifull manner 
w th men tackle victualls & all other needfull puisions, fitt for such 
a voyadge Of an espetiall trust & confidence we haue of the 
Integrity, wisdome & resolucon of o r loueinge freind S r Henry 
Middleton knight doe appointe & authorize him Generall to goe 
in the Trades increase & to Comand all o r said Ships and the men 
in them, haueinge pcured him sufficient authority from o r Sou r eigne 
Lord the kingf ma tie : for that purpose 2 not doubtinge but that he 
will soe behaue himselfe in his chardge as he may bee both feared 
& loued, And that he will w th all his diligence & endevo r prosequute 
o r designes & labo r to bringe this costly voyadge to a happie end. 

2 Item wee doe appointe and ordeine o r loueinge freind m r 
Nicholas Downton to be Leiuetenant of the said Shipps and men 
and to take his passadge in the Pepp Corne. & Beniamyn Greene 
to be cheefe Marchaunt in the Little Darlinge as alsoe o 1 ' good 
freind m r Lawrence ffemell o r cheefe Agent for o r busines at 
Suratt in the East Indies And Mathewe Mollenoux to be Pilott 
maio r for this voyadge, whome we appointe to take passadge in 
the Trades Increase. All w ch Comanders Marchauntf ffacto" 
M 1 ' 3 : & Mariners we trust will soe carry them seluesw th due respect 
one to another & obedience to eu r y one of their Superio rs as loue 
and kindnes may be Contynued on all sides & all wholie apply 
their wittf and endevo rs for the due pformance of this voyadge in 
the best manner they may for the good of the Company. 

3. Item : And for that religious governm* doth best binde 
men to pforrne their duties yt is principally to be cared for, that 
prayers be said eu r y morneinge & eveninge in eu r y Shipp & the 
whole Company called therevnto w th diligent Eyes that none be 
wantinge soe as all may ioyntlie w th reverence & humility pray 
vnto Almightie God to blesse and preserue them from all dangers 
in this longe and tedious voyadge. 

4 Item That noe blasphemeinge of God, Swearinge, Thefte, 
Drunkennes, or otherlyke disorders be vsed but that the same be 
severelie ponished, & that noe diceinge or other vnlawfull games 

1 Died on the homeward voyage of the Peppercorn, 27th July, 1613. 
3 See page 356. 



33 o FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

be admitted for that most comonlie the same is the begyninge of 
quarrellinge and many tymes occasions of murthers a iust provo- 
kacon of Godf? wrath & vengeance (from w ch the Lord deliu r vs 
all) therefore yt shall be needfull that such orders be sett vp and 
published in eu r y Shipp & such ponishm* appointed for such 
Offences as may giue notice to eu r y man what he ought to avoied. 

5 Item that spetiall order be giuen that noe liquor be spilt 
in the ballast of the Shipps or filthines be lefte w tll in bourde w ch in 
heate breadeth noysome smells & infeccon but that there be a 
diligent care to keepe the overlopps & other places of the Shipps 
cleane & sweete w ch is a notable preseruacon of health wherein 
thofficers of o r Shipps in former voyadgf haue beene much to be 
blamed, to the greate spoile of o r Shipps & breedinge of sicknes 
w ch we trust in this will be more carefully reguarded. 

6 Item that the Generall Leiuetenante & m rs : of the Shipps 
doe take due notice by Inventory from eu r y Officer of the Shipps 
before they depte out of the riuer of Thames of the seu r all 
puisions deliu r ed into each Shipp and soe soone as they shall 
come to Sea & not before to settle the same in the chardge of the 
Officers appointed for that purpose in each Shipp vntill w ch tyme 
all stores are to remaine vnder locke and key and that the same 
be entred in the Pursars book vnderwritten by the said Officers 
to thend that such thingc as are prouided for their needfull 
supplies may not be ymbecilled & that nothinge thereof of any 
valewe be ymployed for any vse whatsoeu r w th out a warrant vnder 
the hand of the Generall, Leiuetenante or cheefe Marchant of 
each Shipp respectiuely directed to the Officer that hath such 
chardge w ch warrant shall serue for their dischardge in their 
accomptf ells otherwyse to be awnswerable for the same w th their 
wages : And eu r y such warrant to be registred in the purcers 
booke, the day of the monneth & thoccacon & this vpon forfecture 
of soe much out of the Purcers wages this order to be obserued 
in each Shipp as aforesaid, that at the retourne of the said Shipps 
a true accompt may be yealded howe and in what manner the 
same haue beene vsed and ymployed. 

7 Item That the Generall & m r of the Shipp doe sett downe 
& deliver such instruccons vnto the Comanders of thother Shipps 
that they may keepe company together for the better releife and 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 331 

comforte one of an other & yf seperacon of them should happen 
by Constrainte of weather or tempest that they shall agree of a 
course beforehand & of a place whether to apply them selues to 
finde the rest. 

8. Item That contynuall & true lournalls be kept of eu r y 
dayes Nauigacon duringe the whole voyadge, w th a true relacon of 
eu r y materiall thinge that passeth & this not onlie to be done by 
the Leiuetenant but alsoe by the Marchauntf pursar Pilottf 1 M r 
& M rs matf & that some of the principalls in each Shipp may 
conferr their obseruacons together at convenient tymes once or 
twyce eu r y weeke at the least to the end yf any haue forgotten 
what an other hath obserued the same may be added, soe as a 
pfect discourse 2 may be sett downe to be presented to the 
Governo r & Company when God shall grante them a safe retourne 
to be kept for better direccon of posterytie. 

9. Item we Comend vnto yo u the Generall principally & to 
the rest of the Comanders and masters of a speciall care, that at 
eu r y place where yo u shall water & refresh yo r menn yo u call the 
Companies together geueing them expresse warninge to behaue 
themselues peaceably & ciuilly toward^ the people of those places 
the better to procure their freindshipp toward f the supply of yo r 
wantf , & the lyke in eu r y place where yo u come least the losse 
of yo r hues & ou r throwe of this voyadge pay for their disorders 
beside an vtter discreditt to o r nacon. 

10 Item And that yo r men doe vse a discreete meane in 
eatinge of fruitf & fresh victualls least they surfett & fall into 
diseases whereof we haue had too much experience And the 
better to refraine vnruly appetite we hould yt convenient that 
the Generall appointe some of the discreetest in the Companies 
to pcure & prouide in such places what yo u want & the same 
beinge prouided & brought to the Generall, by him to be reparted 
to each Company what may be needfull & that none presume to 
doe the Contrary w th out seveare ponishm*. And that espetiall 
care be had to releiue the Sicke w th such fresh meatf & other 
comfortable thingf wherew th we haue furnished each Shipp for 
that purpose & not otherwyse to be spent in Ryott & banquett- 
inge & soe the sicke pishe for want of thingf needfull. 

1 Pilot (Mar. Rec. copy). 3 Discouery (Mar. Rec. copy). 






332 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



11 And whereas the straglinge of yo r men in any place where 
they shall arriue or come, may not onlie proue the losse of such 
as shall soe straggle notw th standinge they should be armed but 
alsoe thereby much hurte might happen to the residue of o r 
people. Yt is ordered that yo u doe not pmitt any man in any 
place to straggle or goe from the rest of yo r Companies vnles 
vpon espetiall occasion yo u giue warrant therevnto vpon paine of 
seveare ponishm* to be inflicted vpon such as shall doe to the 
Contrary still doubtinge the worste & standinge vpon yo r guard 
w th out giueinge any trust to the people of the place. 

12 Item yt is expreslie ordered that by a generall consent 
of yo u the Generall Leiuetenante Marchauntf ffacto" Masters 
& Mariners some good order be by yo u taken and sett downe in 
writeinge soe soone as yo u come to Sea conc r ninge the dispose- 
inge of dead mens goodf in the voyadge, either by comittinge the 
same by Inventory to the pticuler keepinge of some men in the 
Shipps & this vpon some convenient consideracon for keepinge 
the same or by sale of soe much thereof at the maine maste as 
may not exceede a third parte of the buyers wages for either 
buyinge or borroweinge to prevent such preiudice to o r Company 
as we haue felte, by Mariners buyinge soe much as their whole 
wages came vnto whereby they haue not onlie forsaken o 1 ' shipps 
before their dischardge but alsoe depriued vs of meanes to 
redresse such wrogf as they haue many waies done vs in the 
voyadge. And to order what sallarie shall be geven the Pursar 
for keepinge accompt thereof to avoied question & controuersie 
heereafter Alsoe that there be noe dealeinge by Exchadge 
betwixt pty & pty neither money for money Comoditee for 
money, or Comodity for Comodity neither outwardf nor home- 
wardf for such Exchandge giueth way for them to bringe more 
then they should or take & purloyne of o r goodf they ought not, 
for prevencon whereof wee order that neither the Pursar or any 
other doe register witnes or take knowledge of any such Con- 
tracte by Exchandge. And noe man to be admitted meanes to 
bringe goodf aboard in any the Shipps more then their Chest 
appointed them will Containe & the same goodf to be pticularly 
entred into the Pursers book vpon paine of forfecture to the 
Company: that w cb shall not be soe entred eu r y Mariner and 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



333 



other of the said Shipps to sett their handf or markf to the 
said orders mentioned in this 12 l article. And yf any ffacto r 
shall happen to die, his goodf Bookf accomptf and other things 
are to be ordered 3 of the Generall & Leiuetenante safely reserued 
& brought come for England, an Inventory first taken thereof & 
registred in the purcers booke, to be witnessed by 2 or 3 other 
of the Marchauntf. 

13 Item for better preseruacon of health o r order is that 
from tyme to tyme as the water Caske shall be emptied of fresh 
water yt be forthw th againe filled w th salt water for prevencon of 
leakeinge 3 and mustines. 

14 Item In yo r passadge betweene the Island of S* Law- 
rence & the Coaste of Sophola 4 beware of the flattf of ludea 5 
vpon w ch flattf it is said that the Currant doth strongly run, 
whereby many shipps haue pished, therefore w th greate care to 
be avoieded. 

6 Item for the fittest placs for refreshinge whether at Saldania 
or at the Bay of S* Augustine in S* Lawrence Island we referr 
the same to yo r discrecon to doe therein as occasion may vrdge 
still fixinge yo r thoughtf & resolucon to arriue at the Barr of 
Suratt by thend of September next accordinge to yo r designes 
w ch is the maine and principall scope of this o r voyadge w th this 
further aduise that wheresoeu 1 ' yo u shall water yo 11 make noe 
longer stay then necessetie shall inforce, to thend yo u may haue 
some oportunity for refreshm* at Succatora there to sett vp o 1 ' 7 
Pynnasse and buy some Alloes Sacatrina to the quantity of 2 
or 3 Tonns, where we pray yo 11 to take notice that in the third 
voyadge W m : Kealeing bought there twenty fower hundred 
waight at 20 Ryalls of 8 the hundred pound w ch is iO4 li of o rs . 

15 Item wee desier that 8 rather yo u touch at Succatora for 
that we hope yo 11 shall meete w th some Guzarattf 9 at that place 
from whome yo 11 may receiue some Intelligence whither W m : 

1 "Tenth" in Mar. Rec. copy, in which paragraphs 10 and n of the text are 
included in paragraph 9. 

" 2 By order (Mar, Rec. copy). 3 Leakidge (Mar. Rec. copy). 4 Sofala. 

5 India (Mar. Rec. copy). See page 118, note. 

6 This paragraph has been missed in the numbering. 7 Your (Mar. Rec. copy). 
8 The (Mar. Rec. copy). 9 Guzerat (Mar. Rec. copy). 



334 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Hawkins and the rest of o r ffacto lefte at Suratte out of the 
Hecto r are liueinge or not, and in what state o r busines there 
standeth whereby yo u may the better there gouerne yo r selues for 
pformance of o r desiers, But yf the tyme of the Monson be soe 
farr spent that yo u cannot arriue at the Barr of Suratt by thend 
of Septemfc or middle of October next at the farthest, then we 
will yo u to take the first oportunytie eyther to sayle to Aden or 
Mocha alias Mochow 1 w th in the mouth of the red Sea aboute 
some ten leagues distant from Aden as we vnderstand, Att w ch 
porte of Mocha we haue heard the Shipps of the fourth voyadge 
haue traded. And where we doubt not, yo u may sell Cloth, lead, 
Iron, Tynn, Quicksylver & some red caps for money or gould, 
for that wee thinke Comodities will be too deare in that place, 
Consideringe o r purpose that yo u goe to Suratt except yo u may 
buy Cloues maces or nutmeggf at a reasonable rate w ch are said 
to be good Comodities at Suratt as well as here in England In 
this place yo u must spend the tyme till oportunity doe serue to 
goe for Suratt w ch will not be till toward the end of August 
followinge, soe as yo u may arriue there by the end of Septemt) 
w ch we pray yo u to endevo r by all possible meanes, But stayinge 
at Aden or Mocha haue espetiall care that yo r men giue noe 
offence to the people there, still keepinge good watch and 
standinge vpon yo r guard & that out of any danger of any Castle, 
fforte, or Gallies to prevent mischeefe 

16 Item being arriued at Suratt we desier yo u to vse the best 
meanes yo u can p r sently to vnderstand of the state of W m : 
Hawkins & the rest of o r people there and heareinge of their 
saffeties either to send vp yo r longe boate w th yo r Indian lohn or 
some other whome yo u thinke more fitt, or finde some meanes to 
cause some of the ffacto ra come abourd yo u , either the said 
m r Hawkins: W ra : ffinche, lohn Dorchester or any other of o r 
ffacto rs there, of whome take due informacon of the state of the 
Country, howe they haue beene accepted of by the kinge, howe 
entreated by the people what priuiledges they have gott, what 
Comodities of o" are there requested, what they haue of that 
Country Comodities vpon their handf to be laden acquaintinge 

1 Mohow (Mar. Rec. copy). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 335 

them alsoe what Comodities yo" haue brought and the quantities 
and takeinge knowledge of their worth there as alsoe what 
Comodities are there presentlie to be had and at what prices 
aswell fittinge for England as Priaman Bantam Banda & the 
Molloccos & whether the same may be had w th such speede as 
yo ul may take hould of the Monson to goe to those ptf. What 
forces the Portugalls 2 haue howe ready the Guzarattf are to 
helpe o r nation & of all other needfull intelligences, by whome yf 
yo u be incourradged we wish yo u to send in the Darlynge and in 
her m r Lawrence ffemell o r principall Agent w th such Comodities 
as may be most vendible w th all speede geueing them warneing to 
be ready to w th stand any Enimies and keepe good watch to 
prevent any mischeefe of fyre or otherwyse w ch lett them be sure 
the Portugalls will practize against them. 

17 Item for that we haue prouided (as yo u knowe) and laden 
in theis shipps sundry Comodities of good valew principally for 
that place as Leade, Tynn, Elaphauntf teeth, Quicksylver, sword 
bladf vermillion red lead Cloth kersies lookinge glasses and some 
red caps accordinge to an Invoice 3 thereof herew th deliu r ed yo u 
wee hould yt convenient that the same be laden in such frigattf 
as may be prouided for that purpose and the same sent vp to 
Suratt w th all speede wafted w th the Pepp Corne yf yo u finde 
Incouradgm* as aforesaid. And for better .pformance of what is 
to be done before o r Agent goe vp to Suratt, we pray yo u and 
him to Consult & take good aduise w th the rest for the deliu r y of 
his ma^ Ires now sent, what present^ are to be deliu r ed, to 
whome, by whome, & in what manner the same to be done w th 
that speede & dilligence that shall be requisite Consideringe the 
shortnes of the tyme in keepinge the Monson for obtayneinge yo r 
other portf , ffor w ch present^ we haue sent in the Trades Increase 
13 peecf of velvette of diu r s Colo" 4 as appeth by the Invoice 
out of w ch yo u are to take for quantity & Colo r what shall be 

1 " They " in Mar. Rec. copy, an obvious error. 

3 Spaniardes (Mar. Rec. copy). 
s Inventory (Mar. Rec. copy). 

4 Mar. Rec. copy adds " viz. 3 peeces Crimson z ps of Incarnadine, i ps. purple: 
"i ps. rose culler, i : ps Orringe 3 ps: Greene, [in margin, greene, sad grene, french 
gr] i ps: gingeline: i ps Blacke," and omits "as appereth by the Invoice." 



33 6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

thought needfull for that purpose the rest to be sould for o r 
Companies benefitt Alsoe we haue sent (as yo u knowe[)] in the 
same Shipp 228-^0 l ounces of guilte plate out of w ch yf yo u thinke 
requisite some alsoe may be geven for present^ accordinge to 
aduise of m r Hawkins & the rest, yf any thinge be presented to 
the kinge, Prince or greate Potentate, yt is to be done (as yo u 
knowe) w th state and Comlines, for present^ for meaner psonns 
we wish yo u to chuse out amonge o r Clothes such Cullers as may 
be acceptable vnto them for vestf for better ^formeinge of this 
busines & accompanyinge o r cheefe Agent, we haue appointed 
lohn 2 ffowler Hughe 3 ffraine Beniaymyn 4 Greene Thomas 5 
Glenham Rowland 6 Webb Rofct 7 Larkyn lohn 8 Williams ffrancis 9 
Slany & lohn 10 Stoughton 2 to remaine there as ffacto rs3 yf yt shall 
be thought fitt to leaue there soe many as the occasions in yo r 
discrecons may be serued and W' n Powlter & W m Reynold? for 
his attendauntf . 

18 Item yf o r former ffacto haue not procured a convenient 
howse to lodge all o r people & Containe all o r good? wee wish o r 
cheefe Agent to Conferr w th them how they may obtaine a larger 
and such a one as may be stronge, and of defence soe as both 
they and o r good? may remaine in saffety 

19 Item the busines aforesaid beinge done, Consideracon is 
to be had for the ladinge and dispatch of o r Shipps and whether 
yt will be requisite to make sale of o r good? at the then currant 
prices for the pformance of the said ladinge, or whether yt will 
be better to expect higher prices, by keepinge the same till fitter 
oportunitie remembringe that what prices shall now be sett of o r 
good? will be a president for heereafter & therefore needfull * to 
hould o r good? in spetiall reputacon, for m r chandize sodenlie 
sould doe comonlie giue small aduancment in price, therefore in 
this pointe yo 11 are to be well aduized, yf then yo u shall hould yt 
more beneficiall to keep o r good? for better m r kett yo u may out 



1 228 (Mar. Rec. copy). 

" In Mar. Rec. copy John Stoughton (or Stoweton, as he is called) comes next 
after Rowland Webb. 

3 The figures placed above the names in the manuscript, and here reproduced, 
seem intended to mark the order of precedence. 

4 Omitted in Mar. Rec. copy. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 337 

of such moneys w ch we haue now sent (w ch are alsoe mentioned 
in o rl Invoice) prouide such thingf as yo 11 thinke necessary to be 
retourned for England w ch together w th the goodf remaineinge 
vpon yo r handf formerly bought, wee wish yo 11 to lade aboard the 
Pepp Corne and the Darlynge yf sufficient to loade them both 
may there be had, or but one of them yf yo u shall finde reason & 
w th out prejudice to o r trade wherein obserue this as agenerall 
order that the good of eu r y voyadge may be m r ked and nombred 
seu r ally and soe expressed in yo r Cargasons & accomptC that the 
goodf of each voyadge may be known e by them selues for that 
they doe not Concerne the selfe same aduenturers. And hereof 
therefore yo u are to be very carefull to prevent wrongf in ladinge 
of goodf wee note theis asspetiall Comodities w ch we desier Viz : 
Indico, of the very best aswell flatt as round soe muchas yo u may 
(w th o r moneys) well Com passe, other Comodities being alsoe to 
be had but lett yo r care be extraordinary to buy the best that 
may be had for money aswell Indico as of all other Comodities. 
Callicoes white tasselled bookf, good quantity & some of the 
courser sorte. Callicoes light colored alsoe as carnacon light 
watchettC strawe Cullers & other 2 light Colo rs but none of 
them course or sad cullers in any manner in theis yo u may 
ymploy to the valewe of twoe thousand Rialls of eight. Shashes 3 
of all sortf for a thowsand Rialls of 8. Synamon of Zelan the 
best that can be gotten well packed vp in skynns twenty Tonns* but 
of noe other sorte neither Scaveson nor Cowchin. Cotton yerne 
of the finest 20 Tonns. Cotton yearne somewhat courser aboute 
fyue tonns. Greene Ginger of the best and largest such as that of 
Battecala 4 Tonns red Saunders wood aboute 3 Tonns. Turbith 
2 Tonns. Opium fiue hundred pound^ weight. Beniamyn 10 Tonns. 5 
Sail Armoniake 2 Tons Olibanu yf good 10 Tonns. Lignum Alices 
as much as yo 11 can gett. Worme seedf clensed as much as 
possiblie may be from the Chaffe & dust by sifteinge & winnoinge 
for that the dust and chaffe is here worth nothinge, to the quantity 

1 Your (Mar. Rec, copy). 2 Other such (Mar. Rec. copy). 

3 Shasses (Mar. Rec. copy). " Shashes are long Towels of Callico woond about 
their heads." (Sandys' Travels in Purchas, Lib. VIII., ch. 8). See also notes on page 
59 of the present volume. 

4 The words in italics are underlined in the manuscript. 

5 Mar. Rec. copy adds : " if there to be had [at reasonable rate." 

Z 



33 8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

of fowcr 1 hundred kintolh. Gum lack : as much as yo u can gett of 
the best & second sorte but none of the worst of any hande 
Sugers of the best some twenty chestf for a triall. Silke of persia 
yf to be had agood quantity. Theis Comodities being bought & 
packed w th rrTchantlike care to prevent damadge m r ked & nombred 
accordinge to former direccon both of the inside and outside for 
better satisfaccon of the Company in the difference of the sortf 
and content^, the rather for that the outmost m r ke may be by 
longe lying at Sea vvorne out, the same to be laden & the shipps 
to be dispatched away w th all expedicon for England. 2 And now 
as a first busines in dispatch to be remembred we wish yo u to 
prouide such Callicoes and other Comodities as may be fittinge 
for Pryaman, Bantam, Banda, & the Molloccoes & the same being 
orderly packed to be shipped w th all speede in the Trades Increase 
for those places w ch w tb fifty thowsand rialls of eight that we wish 
yo u to receiue for 3 ymploym* at Suratt as alsoe the Iron we 
now send Twenty tonns of lead in chestf, three bales w tb Cloth 4 
prouided for Bantam the said shipp to take her first oportunity to 
sayle for Pryaman, together w tb that shipp of the other twoe not 
dispatched for England. 

20 Item beinge arriued at Priaman to make there sale of soe 
much of yo r Iron, Callicoes, & Pintadoes as yo u shall finde fittinge, 
soe much for gould as yo u may & the rest for large pepper wherein 
haue a spetiall care to buy none greene for breath in 5 waight but 
such as shall be dry and cleane 6 from dust to the quantety of 
fower hundreth Tonns or thereabout^ & some ten tonns of 
Beniamyn theis Comodities to be weighed by yo* owne waightf 
into the Shipp & the Purser to keepe due notice of the same with 
such of the ffacto r8 as shall be appointed for that purpose that 
they may be able to giue vs agood accompt thereof, In execucon 
of this busines take this for aduise, that yo u make shewe to be 
gone from thence w th a purpose to buy noe pepp, for that when 
they pceaue yo u purpose to depte they will oifer yo u pepp at much 
lower rate than otherwyse, therefore yt is fitt to seeme vnwillmg 

1 One hundred quintalls (Mar. Rec. copy). 2 London (Mar. Rec. copy). 

8 Reserue from (Mar. Rec. copy). This is evidently the right reading. 

4 Twelue strayned Clothes (Mar. Rec. copy). 

5 Breach of (Mar. Rec. copy). c Freed (Mar. Rec. copy). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 339 

to buy and some tymes to make refusall will not be amisse, 
besidt make shewe that yo u haue but few Callicoes or other 
Comodities to sell, the better to giue them edge to buy, In the 
pformance of this busines remember still yo r purpose to goe for 
Bantam and Banda that yo u slip not the oportunity of the Monson, 
And soe w th what yo u haue there taken in and restinge in the 
Shipp for Bantam there dischardge both Iron, leade, Callicoes & 
Cloth &c : prepared for that place for a stocke to prouide Lamkin 
silke of the finest & whitest (but noe Canton 1 silke at any hand) 
w th what other thingf yo u shall hould needfull against yo r retourne 
from Banda whether we wish yo u to make all possible haste 
takeinge w th yo u such facto" to leaue there as in yo r iudgm* shall 
be thought meete, and for stocke of the fyfty thowsand riall^ 
before mentioned what yo u thinke requisite and such China stuffy 
and dishes as yo u may learne at Bantam to be fittinge for the 
place. 

21 Item being arriued at Banda present such guiftf to the 
Gou r no r or Savander 2 there as in yo r discrecon shall seeme fittinge 
and there prouide three hundreth Tonns of Nutmeggf of the best 
and soundest that may be gotten, freed from dust and rumps all 
that may be, remembringe that the same will not be worth the 
freight & chardgf Alsoe 20 Tons of Maces the lardgest and 
brightest that may be gotten but none that is darke Colored red 
maces, w cb are called femenyn maces & here little worth, for 
accomplishinge hereof as alsoe for to leaue stocke convenient there 
for puicon for a future voyadge, keepe in yo r shipp soe much 
money & Callicoes as yo u may deeme sufficient. And yf being 
arriued at Banda yo tl hold it possible & find yt convenient to goe 
to the Maluccos whilest the Nutmeggf & maces are puideinge, to 
seeke for Cloues, and haueing gotten to yo r content therein, to 
retourne to Banda there to take in the mace & nutmeggf & w th 
speede to retourne to Bantam leaueing a Convenient nomber of 
ffacto r3 & stocke as shall be needfull at Banda as aforesaid. And 
beinge retorned to Bantam & haueinge brought atrue pticular of 
what is lefte at Banda vnder the handf of the ffacto rs there, then 
to take in such silkf and other thingf as shall in yo r absence be 
prouided there for London, where haueing setled the busines & 

1 Cotton (Mar. Rec. copy) ; but see page 286. 2 Satiander (Mar. Rec. copy). 

Z I 



34 o FIRST LETTER BOOK 01' 

facto in good order & taken a pticular relacon of o r accomptf 
and Comodities there lefte, the Coppies whereof to be signed by 
o r ffacto 1 ' 9 & to be brought alonge w th yo u , and order geven by yo 11 
to keepe accompt of eu r y voyadge by yt selfe & soe of the retornes 
in lyke manner that the Adventurers vpon eu r y voyadge may 
haue their right as they Consist of diu r sity of Adventurers, then 
in Godf name w th all due speede to retorne for England. 

And haueing thus farr pceeded in a direct course we hould yt 
fitt to looke backe to the Barr at Suratt and there to Consider yf 
thingf fall out contrary to expectacon that neither o r people 
should be there in saffetie nor the place fitt for o r trade ne yett 
mcouradgm 4 to pursue the same any farther In reguard of the 
Comodities prouided fitt for the seruice of that place & Aden & 
not elswhere w th in o r knowledge o r expresse order is that vpon 
notice of the premisses yo u forthw th w th the Monson retourne for 
Aden or Mocha in the red Sea yf in yo r passadge to Suratt yo u 
haue not visited the same & done what might be done for the 
vent of o r Comodities & there to try for dispatch & vent of o r 
said Merchandize w ch beinge effected according to o r desires, yf 
possiblie yo u may be fitted by the lunckf arriueing there from 
diu r s portf out of the Indies w th m r chandize fitting for England, 1 
to lade either one twoe or all of o r Shipps w th the same goodf 
brought thether as namelie smooth pepp, druggf of all sortf 
fitting for this place, Indico of the best sorte, Nutmeggf, Maces, 
Synamond Callicoes Beniamyn, Olibanum, Mirr, Opyum, red 
Sanders lignum Alices and such like & the Ship or shipps soe 
laden w th speede to direct their course for England, And yf any 
of the Shipps remaine vnladen, then w th such Callicoes as yo 11 can 
buy of the lunckf fittinge for Pryaman Bantam or Banda or the 
Molloccos to saile directlie for Pryaman and there to pursue 
trade & from thence further as aforesaid as in yo r discrecon shall 
seeme best. 

22 Item we thinke yt not amisse further to aduise yo u that 
findinge faile of trade at Suratt you endevo r whilest yo u are there 
to inuite the Guzarattf w th such Comodities as yo u looke for to 
repaier to the portf of Delisha or Tamarie at the Hand of 
Socotara where yo u may agree to deale w tb them for the same, 

1 London (Mar. Rec. copy). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 341 

w ch yf yo u doe y u & they alsoe shall saue much Customes yo u 
shall pay in other port to the Governo" thereof, yt is to be 
vnderstoode yf noe trade be 1 to be had at Suratt there shall 
be noe cause to settle any ffactory there, In such case we 
appointe m r Lawrence ffemell & the rest of o r ffacto" now sent 
to proceede w th yo u to Aden or Mocha or to such other place as 
yo u shall thinke fitt to direct yo r course for benefitt of trade & 
findinge any such place as may be beneficiall to o r Company 
aswell for vent of Cloth and other o r English m r chandizes as for 
Comodities of those Countries fittinge for this wee referr to yo r 
discrecon the setlinge of o r ffactory there and the appointem* of 
any of o r ffacto" to reside there w th such stocke as in yo r iudg- 
ment may seerne Competent to defray their chardge & make 
puision of Comodities w ch that Country may yeald against the 
arriuall of a second supply And in that place m r ffemell to be o r 
principall Agent But findinge noe such place & proceeding to 
Bantam o r order is that the ymploym* of o r Shipps for pformance 
of their ladeinge be at yo r direccon, and that M r ffemell shall there 
be lefte cheefe Agent and soe many of the rest of o r ffacto rs now 
sent as yo u and he shall deeme fitt, the rest to be placed at 
Banda & all o r ould ffacto rs to be brought home w th yo u from 
thence excepting Augustine Spauldinge and twoe more such as 
haue that languadge the out 2 ould ffacto" 2 to deliu r vp their 
chardge by accompte & Inventory to o r said Agent & to bringe 
home a Coppy of the same to be deliu r ed to the Gou r no r and 
Comittees of the Company then beinge. 

23 Item we ordaine that such of the ffacto rs as shall remaine 
in the ships at the buyinge of any goodf shall be ymployed to 
weigh the same, pay the money, and keepe due accompt thereof 
& that nothinge be done either in buyinge or sellinge of goodf 
w th out their priuity that they may write the same into their bookf 
& be abell to giue vs reason for what is bought or sould either by 
writeing or at their retourne for England, and that they shall 
acquaynte the Generall & cheife Comander in eu r y shipp eu r y 
night w th what they haue done that day & that the Pursars 
booke & theirs shall then be compared together, soe as yt may 
appeare whether all that hath beene bought hath beene receiued 

1 Bee not (Mar. Rec. copy). 2 Not in Mar. Rcc. copy. 



342 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

into the Shipp & there weighed aswell as on the Shore, notice 
to be geven 1 what is wantinge & enquiry 2 what is become thereof 
& Coppies of eu r y of the said accomptf to be sent home by 
Sondry Shipps, & the same accomptf for what hath beene then 
done at Pryaman, Bantam, Banda, & the Molloccoes be alsoe 
registred in o r bookf at Bantam. 

24 Item that all thingf bought and sould in eu r y place by 3 
by some of o r ffacto 1 " 8 for that purpose residinge there faier 
written in o r bookf w ch we now send signed by the Gou r no r & 
Comittees, w ch bookf we order to be deliu r ed one for o r ffacto 
at Suratt, one for the ffacto" at Banda, one for the ffacto 1 " 9 at 
Bantam, and thother for them at Pryaman or ells where where 
ffacto 1 " 8 shall recide for vs, And the same bookf there in the 
seu r all places to be kept as record^ of those that shall succeede 
and that out of the same we may haue Coppies of what wee shall 
requier for the Companies better satisfaccon. Alsoe that none of 
o r ffacto rs whomsoeu r be suffered to bringe from thence any bookf 
of accomptf either passed by him selfe or by any others, other 
then Coppies for him selfe or for vs subscribed by him that shall 
succeede in that chardge and twoe more of o r ffacto ra there the 
said Coppies soe sent to be sealed vpp. And in theis yo r 
passadges and traffiques o r desier is that yo u should informe yo r 
selfe of safe harbo rs and places of repaier for the vent of o r 
English Comodities either aboute the porte of Sabull* nere Suratt 
or the riuer Syndus & Laree, 5 or the Cape of Rosalgat 6 or any 
Coste of the porte 7 of Arabia where yo u may haue kinde inter- 
teynem* of 8 freedome from Enimies, to w ch places yo u may assay 
to invite Mores Guz r att or any other people tradeinge in those 
part?, w th such m r chandize as may be fitt for this Country and 
be rendred for such as we shall send at such tymes as yo u may 
suppose o r shippinge may w th Conveniencie arriue there, amongst 
w ch portf we hould the portf aforesaid in the Hand of Socotora 

1 Taken (Mar. Rec. copy). 3 Bee (Mar. Rec. copy). 

3 Inquired (Mar. Rec. copy). * Dabull (Mar. Rec. copy). 

5 See note 2, page 251. 

6 Resolgate (Mar. Rec. copy). The "Rozel-gate" of Herbert (1665), "Rouselgout" 
of Fryer (1698), "Cape Russelgate M of Anglo-Indians, Ras-el-Hadd, i.e. "Cape of 
the (S.E.) Limit," the low and sandy promontory of Arabia Felix which gives 
entrance to the Gulf of Oman. 

7 Or any porte of the cost (Mar. Rec. copy). 8 Or (Mar. Rec. copy). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 343 

&c: to be most fittest aswell for the neernes of the place as 
saueinge the Customes & the highe way for the Guzaratt? and 
other tradinge into the red Sea at their ordinary seasons And 
thus haueing sett downe what we thinke needfull for o r busines 
of m r chandizeinge we thinke yt fittinge to sett downe some what 
for order in the generall goifnm 4 in o r shippinge &c : 

25 Item we sett downe for o r absolute order and resolucon 
that noe pson whatsoeu r w ch shall succeede by appointem* or 
otherwyse in any place of Comand or Office either in any of o r 
shipps, or in any of o r ffactories at Bantam Banda Suratt or any 
other place whatsoeu r shall take or be allowed the wages of his 
p r dicesso rs but though he be remoued preferred and come to any 
such place or office he shall content himselfe w th such wages as 
we haue formerlie agreed w th him for w th out any further demand 
or encroachment vpon the Company for the same vnlesse the 
Governo 1 " and Comittees of o r Company for the tyme beinge 
shall be pleased to graunte the same, or any other allowance of 
gratitude or reward^ vpon their desertf . 

26 Item for that the Company accompteth yt presumption 
for any o r ffacto rs to assume to them selues the name of Captaine 
w th out their expresse order, we ordeyne that they shall come 
home as priuate Marchauntf & onlie reteyne that title prayinge 
yo u the Generall to forbeare to Conferr any other title or dignity 
vpon them. 

27 Item That noe Cabens be altered -nor pticions pulled 
downe in any of o r Shipps or chandged from the state they now 
are in at the settinge out of the same w ch in former voyadges 
haue beene done to the greate hurte of o r Company and discon- 
tent & hazard of all. 

28 Item that noe wages to noe pson whatsoeu 1 be increased 
or giuen contrary to what wee haue already here appointed but 
the pties to be referred to be rewarded by the Company at their 
retourne as they shall be found to haue deserued : Nor m ra : 
ffacto, nor other Officers of speciall place in o r Shipps to be 
remoued w th out Consent of such of the Counsell as we haue 
appointed to aduise w th yo u the Generall vpon all o r occasions, to 
w ch end we haue thought yt convenient & soe ordered, that m r 
Nicholas Downton, m r Lawrence ffemell and such others as yo u 



344 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

the Generall shall thinke good to call vnto yo u shall vpon any 
occasion consult & aduise w th yo u for the disposeinge of any 
busines of ymportance in this voyadge whose psons and counsells 
we pray yo u loueinglie to ymbrace, And all them same in the 
Councell aforenamed excepting them lefte in the Countrie as 
ffacto 1 ' 8 to be in lyke manner of the Councell w th yo 11 homewardf 
yf they or any of them doe retourne w th yo 11 . And not soe to 
thinke vpon aucthority sett vpon yo u that the same should serue 
for any yo r pticular respect knowinge that a wise man is best 
tried when he is put in authority & that he is accompted of more 
fortitude that over cometh himselfe then he that prevaileth against 
a multitude. 

29 Item as yo u knowe this voyadge being exceedinge trouble- 
some & costlie will not admitt any priuate trade but whatsoeu 1 " is 
achiued by this generall & greate chardge should be applyed to 
the benefitt of o r whole Company. Therefore we sett yt downe 
as an absolute order that noe man neither Generall, Leiutenant, 
Marchaunt, Master or Mariner or any other pson or psons what- 
soeu r in any theis o r Shipps doe trade or deale for any m r chandize 
whatsoeu r w ch we shall prouide for o r retourne or any other sorte 
of m r chandize more then will be conteyned w th in his proportioned 
chest of allowance for this voyadge and the same to be registred 
in the pursars booke to thend that yf any pson die vpon the 
voyadge their freindf & execute 1 " 8 may knowe what they had & 
take notice what is become of the same houlding yt most reason- 
able 1 that those whoe lyue by o r ymploym' should deale w th the 
Comodities w ch we labo r to gett to produce meanes for paym* of 
their wages and defrayinge of chardges of this o r greate and 
costlie voyadge. 

30 Item we forbid all vnnecessary expence of shooteing of 
Ordinance at drinking of healthes 2 or at the Captaines goeing 



1 Vnreasonable (Mar. Rec. copy) ; this is evidently the right rendering. 

8 Cp. Hamlet, Act I., Scene 2 : 

"In grace whereof, 

No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day, 
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, 
And the king's rouse the heavens shall bruit again, 
Re-speaking earthly thunder." 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 345 

ashore or such lyke for that thereby much poulder is wastfully 
consumed and o r shipp and goodf put in much hazard & danger 
& lykewyse by yt way is geven to the Gunners vnder culler 
thereof to ymbecille the same. 

31 Item for avoieding Confusion in the gou^m* of o r people 
& for that nothing is soe vncertaine as the state of mans lyfe. 
Wee ordaine that yf God shall call yo u S r Henry Middleton 
(during this voyadge) out of this world w ch God defend then that 
m r Nicholas Downton shall succeede yo u & excercyse yo r chardge 
whome we trust will soe behaue himselfe therein as shall be 
agreable to the good reporte of sundry men of worth giuen of 
him: But yf yt shall please God that the said m r Nicholas 
Downton shall depte this lyfe then we Comitt the government of 
o r Shipps & the Mariners therein to such as we haue nominated 
in a writeing subscribed by the Gou r no r & sealed w th the scale of 
o r Company put vpp into a boxe sealed w th hard waxe & deliu r ed 
to S r Henrie Middleton to be kept close and not opened soe longe 
as the said S r Henry Middleton l & Nicholas Downton or either 
of them shall lyue : but yf yt shall please God to take both of 
them out of this world Then we ordaine that all o r M rs & 
Mariners in o r said Shipps shall submitt them selues to the 
gouernm* and Comand of such .pson or psons as we haue 
nominated therevnto in o r said writeinge sealed vp in a Boxe as 
aforesaid. Prouided alwaies that noe }?son what soeu r w ch shall 
succeede in the aforesaid place of government shall demand be 
allowed or expect the wages of his predicessor but shall content 
himselfe w tl1 his first wages promysed him by the Company. 

32 Item for that in sondry voyadges heretofore the Company 
haue beene much wronged by the Generalls Captaines & m ra of 
their Shipps in takeing diu r s psons into the same shipps & 
carryinge them alonge w th them in the said voyadge to the East 
Indies for their pticuler gaine and proffitt & haue lefte the same 
pties amonge o r Company ffacto rs in the Indies where they haue 
driuen and handled for them selues & their freindf a pticular 
trade to the greate chardge & hindrance 2 of o r Company, & haue 

1 The words "to be kept .... Middleton" have been omitted in the Mar. Rec, 
copy. 

2 Preiudice (Mar. Rec. copy). 



346 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

practised w th o r ffacto r9 there to deceaue vs, and to convey 1 
sundry of the ritchest Comodities of those pt to their priuate 
vses. It is therefore o r expresse o r der & direccon to yo u S r Henry 
Middleton Generall of this o r ffleete & to Nicholas Downton 
Leiuetenant of the same & to all other the Marchauntf ffacto 18 
m Pursars & Mariners and eu r y other pson or psons enterteyned, 
and hired to serue in this said voyadge that neither yo u or any of 
yo u shall admitt or suffer to passe in, or receiue into any of o r 
said Shipps in this o r now intended voyadge any pson or psonns 
of what degree or quality soeu r other then such pson or psons as 
are interteyned & hired by the Governo r and Comittees of o r said 
Company to passe therein. 

33. Item yf duringe yo r Contynuance in the pt of the Indies 
vpon good aduise & Consideracon yo u finde yt more profitable 
for the Company to haue one of theis Shipps remaine in the 
Country there to trade from place to place then to retorne home 
laden w th the rest, Then we referr the same to be ordered by yo u 
as shall seeme good in yo r discrecon to make choise of one of the 
smaller Shipps to be employed for that purpose. 

34 Item. And lastly to prevent disorders & misbehavio of 
the Mariners of theis o r shipps either in their passadge out, or 
retourne home vpon o r owne Coastf wee ordaine that yo u sufferr 
none of o r foresaid Shipps either outwardf or homeward^ to goe 
into any of the portf of ffalmouth Plymouth or Darthmouth 
vnlesse necessity compell yo u therevnto. 

And soe haueing remembred what we thinke needfull for yo r 
direccon in this voyadge & relyinge vpon yo r dilligence & care in 
pursueing o r busines to o r most aduantage wee Comitt yo u to the 
proteccon of Almighty God whome we beseech to blesse yo r 
endeavo & graunte yo u a saffe passadge and saffe retourne to all 
o r Compfortf. 

Considering that vnto m r Sharpey Generall of the fourth 
voyadge Comission was geven to seeke for trade at Aden Mocha 
Suratt Cambaia Laree, Nigertuttey in the Ryver Syndus, at 
Priaman Banda or the Molluccoes & where he found yt most 
convenient & profitable that he should there settle a factory for 

1 " Containe " in Mar. Rec. copy, an evident blunder. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 347 

increase of trade to the benefitt of the Generall Company, 
forasmuch as yt is credibly reported that they haue traded at 
Mocha we suppose that they haue there setled a factory, where- 
fore we pray yo u at yo r arriuall at Socotora carefully to enquire 
what is become of them and hereing that they haue left ffacto r8 at 
Mocha we pray yo u vse yo r best meanes to send o r ires vnto 
them w ch herew th are dehVed yoV that they may receiue some 
comforte or there findinge noe good 2 conveyaunce we Suppose at 
Suratt yo u shall not onlie heare of them, but from thence by the 
lunckf bound to Moccha yo u may send o r ires, & advise them 
whether yt be fitt to stay there or come to Suratt to be employed 
in the Companies seruice or retourne in one of the first Shipps 2 & 
bringe w th them in some good Comodities soe much as is 
remaineinge in their hand? for thaccompt of the fourth voyadge, 
but yf yo u heare not of them in any of those places, 3 then we pray 
yo u to enquire for them at Priaman Bantam Banda or 4 the 
Molloccoes yf yo u goe thither, and findinge them deliu 1 o r ires 
whereby they shall ;pceiue that it is o r pleasure : they shall followe 
the direccons w ch yo ur selfe & those appointed to Consult w th yo u 
in this voyadge and the said ffacto 1 ' 8 shall vpon due deliberacon 
conclude vpon. 5 

Henry Middleton 
Beniamyn Greene Nicholas Downton 

Gyles Thornton 

Abraham Lawse 

W m : Pemberton 

If you shall finde in yo r trauaile or can convenientlie come by 

ostscr . ta any faire 6 byrdf, or beast f or any other thing? 

fitt [for] vs to p r sent to his Ma tie : or any of the noble 

1 See page 311. 3 Partes (Mar. Rec. copy). 

2 Not in Mar. Rec. copy. 4 And (Mar. Rec. copy). 

5 The Mar. Rec. copy concludes : 

Signed by S r Thomas Smith Gouernor 
Robert Bell 
Robert Middellton 
Thomas Style 
Hughe Hamersly 
Robert Offley. 

6 Rare thinges as live birdes &c (Mar. Rec. copy). 



348 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Lordf that are o r honorable freindf, we pray and requier yo u 
to be carefull to prouide and send the same w th espetiall chardge 
to some carefull man or men. 1 




Most highe and mighty kinge 2 

|S there is nothing w dl increaseth more the glorie and 
dignity of Sovereigne Princes vpon earth, then to 
extend their renowne vnto farr dissident nations ; Soe 
havinge vnderstoode of late yeares from some of o r 
loueing Subiectf that haue traded into diu r s Countries neere 
adioyneinge vnto yo rs , of the reputacon and greatnes 

Twoc of this draught J i x r i 

were written w* of yo r power and Dominion, Wee have mcour- 

Blanckes J r 

adged o r said Subiectf to vndertake a voyadge 
into yo r Country aswell to sollicite yo r freindshipp & amity w th 
vs, as to enterteyne such Comodities of each others Countryes 
as may be most of vse the one to the other, beinge nothinge 
doubtfull but such will be yo r Princelie magnanimity & dispo- 
sicon to embrace this o r desier, & not onelie to receiue o r people 
\v th yo r accustomed benignity and favo r , but for their better 
encourradgm* to afford yo r Ryall proteccon for the setling of a 
factorie there, w th such security & liberty of comerce as shall be 
most Convenient for the aduancm* of the mutuall proffitt and 
Comoditie of each others SubiectC : wherein for o r parte we doe 
willingly offer o r selues & the libertie of o r kingdomes & Countryes 
whensoeu r any of yo r Subiect^ shall vndertake to haue comuni- 
cation w th vs. And in the meane tyme as a pledge of o r Royall 
inclynacon & desier toward^ yo 11 wee haue sent yo u a small 

1 Mar. Rec. copy continues: "that retourn to see them carefully keept and 
" delivered vs, And w th all yf you shall knowe any of the marryners or other to haue 
' ' any such, w h you cannot procure from them for reason then that you send vs 
" notice thereof to thend wee may take order therin accordingly." The whole of this 
postscript is, in the Mar. 'Rec. copy, incorporated in the last paragraph of the 
commission. 

2 These are the royal letters carried out in the Sixth Voyage for presentation to 
various Eastern princes and governors. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



349 



present by o r servant S r Henry Middleton knight w ch we pray 
yo u to accept, as an introduccon to that freindshipp w ch we hope 
will fructifye and increase to each others Contentm*. Geven at 
o r Pallace of Westminst r the &c : 




lames by the grace of Almightie God kinge of 

greate Brittaine ffraunce & Ireland defendo r of the 

Christian faith &c : To the highe and myghty 

K:ofCambaia. f . " - 

Prince the greate kinge of Cambaia, Empero r of 
Mogores &c : greetinge 

Most highe & mighty Empero r . 

(EE Cannot but expresse vnto yo u the highe Contentm* 
we haue receiued, at the kinde reception & interteynem* 
of o r seruant Captaine William Hawkins, and his 
Company at yo r porte of Suratt, where they haue 
receiued soe many demonstrations by yo r principall Officers and 
Comanders there, of yo r desier to embrace o r loue and freindshipp 
& to interteyne a Correspondence of peaceable trade, and Comerce 
w th o r Subiectf, as we cannot but thankfully acknowledge the 
same, & reciprocally offer the lyke effectf toward f yo u and yo r 
people, whensoeu r they shall vndertake to haue any Comunicacon 
of trade w th o r kingdomes and Dominions : But we were sorry 
to vnderstand of that vnhappy accident, w ch befell o r Subiectf in 
their retourne from yo r Coastf toward^ their Shipps, 1 by being 
vnworthilie surprized w th in yo r Streames by diu r s ffriggottf of the 
Portugalls of Goa whoe vniustlie haue taken from them nyneteene 
of o r Subiectf besidf agreate quantity of their marchandize, and 
detayne them prisonners at Goa, vnder this sole pretext, as yf 
both yo r selfe and yo r Countreys were assubiected to the Crowne 
of Spaygne and therefore not lawfull for any other Christian 
people to trade w th yo u : w ch indignity thoughe Almighty God hath 
geven vs power enoughe to revenge agaynst them, yett because 
yt hath relacon to the greatnes of yo r estate as beinge done w th in 

1 See page 219. 



35 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

the Compasse of yo r power & aucthority, Wee haue thought 
good, first to represent yt vnto yo u ; and to seeke redresse of yt, 
by yo r meanes, then to enter into any course of hostility in those 
partf contrary to the peaceable inclynacon of trade w dl our 
Subiectf are willinge to entertayne w th all other Nations ; 
Notw th standing w ch hard successe o r Subiectf are noe whit 
discourradged from vndertakeinge (as now they doe) another 
voyadge into yo r Countreys, w th three good shipps laden w th such 
Comodities of o r kingdomes as may be most of vse to yo r people, 
being Confident of yo r further favo r and proteccon, w th such 
Immunities and priuiledgf for their trade and Comerce w th yo r 
people, as may incourradge them more and more to fixe and 
Contynue a firme Correspondencie there to the increase of 
proffitt of each others Subiectf . And for a pledge of o r Royall 
inclinacon towardf yo u Wee haue sent yo u a small present by 
o r Servaunt S r Henry Middleton knight, Generall of this o r 
voyadge w cL wee pray yo u to accept in good parte & to vse him 
w th all courtesie and respect, as is befittinge the quallity of his 
place. Geven at o r Pallace of Westminsf this &c : 



lames by the grace of Almightie God kinge of 
greate Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland defendo r of the 
commander of Christian faith &c: To the right Honorable 

j^e cheefe Commander of the greate Citty of 
Cambaia greetinge 

|HERE[AS] wee haue vnderstoode from some of o r Sub- 
iectf , what greate courtesies they haue receiued, and 
daylie doe receiue at yo r haundf , in their arriuall and 
settlement of their trade in the greate Citty of Cam- 
baia, We could not omytt att this second voyadge thither, but to 
expresse vnto yo u our thankfull acknowledgment for the same, 
w th o r Constant hope of yo r further endevo rs toward^ them aswell 
for their future saffeguard & proteccon in those places, against 
the Malice and violence of any that should attempt to wronge 
them, as for their better incourradgment to establish and increase 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 35 1 

(as now they haue begun alreadie) a firme Correspondencie of 
trade in those partf , wherein for o r parte, wee will not omytt 
any thinge that may tend to the furtheringe of soe greate a good 
for the aduancm* of o r Subiectf. 

As for the iniury and losse w ch o r Subiectf latelie receaued by 
the Portingalls of Goa (as is well knowen vnto yo u ) thoughe we 
want noe meanes to revenge o r selues against them, yett because 
we would be loath to interrupt the peaceable course of trade in 
those partf, and for that the Iniury doth alsoe redound to yo u , as 
being done w th in the lymittf of yo r Comand, Wee haue thought 
good first to desier yo r peaceable Intercession for the redresse 
thereof, before o r Subiectf should attempt any thinge hostilly 
agaynst them, wherein yo u shall doe a worke worthy of yo r selfe, 
and by w ch yo u shall oblige o r people more and more vnto yo u . 
And for o r good inclinacon toward^ yo u , wee haue sent yo u atoken 
of o r loue and frendship by o r servant S r Henrie Middleton knight, 
Generall of this o r voyadge. 

Geven at o r Pallace of Westminst r this 



lames by the grace of Almighty God kinge of greate 
Brittane ffraunce & Ireland, defendo r of the Christian 

To the kinge of faith &C I 

To the highe & mighty Prince the kinge of 
Succatora Geeteinge. 

Most mighty kinge 

AUEINGE vnderstoode from some of o r loueinge Sub- 
iectf , that in their course of Navigation & tramque 
into diu r s partf of the East Indies, they haue alsoe 
visited yo r Coastf & Territories where they haue not 
onlie refreshed themselues of such necessaries, as are belonginge 
to soe greate a Nauigacon, but haue alsoe receiued the best inter- 
teynem* that could be expected ; wee hould yt o r parte to 
acknowledge the same w th thankf, and to ymbrace yo r amity 
and freindshipp w th all the respect^ of hono r , that may tend to 
the establishinge and encreaseing of the same to o r mutuall 




352 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

contentacon & aduancem* of proffitt of each others Subiectf ; 
Wherein for o r parte, as we doe readily offerr o r selues and any 
thinge that shall be in o r power, soe wee doe expect the lyke 
effect^ from yo u , to redound vpon o r Subiectf, in yo r good vsage 
of them, and affording them yo r princelie favo r and proteccon 
against such as should goe aboute to harme them. And for a 
pledge of this o r good inclinacon toward^ yo u , wee haue sent yo u 
this small Present by o r servant S r Henrie Middleton knight, w ch 
wee pray yo u to accept in good parte Given at o r Pallace of 
Westm : this &c : 



lames by the grace of Almighty God kinge of greate 

Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland defendo 1 " of the Christian 

faith &c : To the most highe & mightie Prince 

Kinge of Bantham 

the kinge of Bantham Greetinge 
Right highe and mighty Prince 

|T hath beene noe small contentm* vnto us to vnderstand 
from o r SubJectf;" retourned from their last voyadge 
into yo r Countries, both howe favorablie they haue 
beene vsed by yo u , and yo r people, & howe willinge 
yo u haue beene to interteyne o r loue & freindshipp, both w ch , yo u 
haue beene Contented to confirme vnto vs by a present of fower 
Balls 1 of silke w dl yo 11 haue sent vnto vs, ffor w ch wee can not but 
retourne vnto yo u o r harty thankf w th all the kinde demonstrations 
of o r reciprocall desier to increase o r amity & correspondency w th 
yo u , as far as the same may be honorable vnto vs, & profitable 
to each others Subiectf ; In confidence whereof o r Subiectf 
haueinge vndertaken a new voyadge into yo r Country for the 
reestablishinge of their trade & tramque w th yo r Subiect, wee 
hope yo u will Contynewe vnto them yo r accustomed favo rs , and 
afford them such liberties & ymunities there, as they may be 
thereby both incourradged in their greate adventures, and 
secured from oppression or wronge of any that would goe aboute 

1 Bales? 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 353 

to harme them. And in thankfulnes of theis yo r kindnesses to 
o r people, wee haue sent yo u a token by this bearer o r Servant 
S r Henry Middleton knyght, Generall of o r present voyadge 
Giuen at o r Pallace of Westminst 1 ' this &c : 




lames by the grace of Almighty God kinge of 
greate Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland defendo r of the 
Christian faith &c: To the most highe and 
mightie Prince the kinge of Tedore, Greetinge 

Most highe & mighty kinge 

|S wee haue taken greate contentm* to vnderstand from 
o r Marchauntf att their retourne from their last 
voyadge out of yo v Country, howe kindlie & favorably 
they haue beene interteyned by yo u and yo r people 
in their peaceable trade, soe we Cannot but reiteratiuely expresse 
o r thank^ for the same, w th all the respectf of hono 1 ' that can be 
expected from vs, being readie both to ymbrace yo r freindshipp 
and amity & to establish a constant entercourse of trade & 
traffique betwixt each others Subiectf for w dl purpose, o r Subiectf 
haueing vndertaken a new voyadge into yo r Country, wee could 
not but take occasion to salute yo u , & to pray yo u to Contynewe 
yo r favo 1 ' towardf them, w th such Conditions of saffetie & ymunitie 
to their .psons, Shipps and goodf , as they may be both encoradged 
in their iust and honest course, and protected against any wronge 
and vyolence of any that would goe aboute to harme them, And 
for a pledge of o r Princelie disposicon towardf yo u . Wee haue 
sent yo u a token by o r servant S r Henrie Middleton knight 
Generall of o 1 ' Marchauntf present voyadge Geven at o r 

Pallace of Westminst 1 ' this &c : 



I B 




354 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

lames by the grace of Almightie God, kinge of 

greate Brittaine ffraunce & Ireland defendo r of the 

to the Governor Christian faith &c : To the right honorable 

of Aden lord) the Qoverno r of the Citty of Aden 

Greetinge 

Right honorable Lord. 

I 

j HE Entercouse of amyty and freindshipp w ch hath 
beene theis many yeares betweene vs & o r Predecesso, 
and the mighty howse of Ottonan, confirmed by soe 
many demonstrations of free Comerce & libertie of 
trade throughe each others kingdomes & domynions, hath 
incourradged o r Marchauntf to frequent alsoe those partf , where 
yo u haue chardge, and the rather because they haue lately 
vnderstoode that twoe of their Shipps in their course of Nauiga- 
tion into diu r s partf of the East Indies, haue alsoe beene in 
the mouth of the red Sea & found opportunity of tramque by 
enterteyneinge each others Comodities w ch hath induced them 
nowe to vndertake this voyadge, and prayed o r intercession vnto 
yo u for them, that they might be favorably receaued, and inioye 
in those part? alsoe such liberty of trade w t]l saffetie and good 
vsage for their persons, Shipps and goodf, as they now haue and 
inioye in the hether part? of the Grand Signers domynions, w ch 
wee doe not doubt but yo u will be willinge to afford vnto them, 
and the rather because they bringe w th them a safe Conduct from 
the Grand Signier in that behalfe. And of o r good will & inclina- 
tion toward? yo u , wee haue sent yo u a small token by o r Servant 
S r Henry Middleton knight, w ch wee pray yo u to accept in good 
parte. And soe we Comitt yo u to the proteccon of the most 
highe & almighty God the Greater & Preseruer of all thing? : 
ffrom o r Pallace at Westminst r this &c : 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 355 

lames by the grace of Almightie God kinge of greate 
of Nero. Brittainc ffraunce and Ireland Defendo r of the 
Christian faith &c: To the right honorable the 
Sabander of Nero, l Greeteinge. 

Right honorable Lord 
j 
|LTHOUGHE wee haue heretofore by o r ires vnto 

yo u expressed o r acknowledgem* for the favorable 
vsage & interteynem* yo u haue giuen to o r Subiectf 
in their trade and traffique w th in yo r Countries, 
yett they haueing now vndertaken a lyke voyadge thither 
againe, wee cannot but reiterate o r former acknowledgm* as 
a matter honorable to yo u , and acceptable to vs, And the 
rather because wee doe not doubt but thereby yo u will be more & 
more induced to afford vnto o r Subiectf such further favo r & 
pteccon w th all Condicons of hono r and saffety to their persons, 
Ships & goodf, as may encoradg them to contynewe their trade 
& Comerce w th yo r people ; wherein yo 11 shall doe a worke worthy 
of yo r selfe, and much advantagious to the promtt of each others 
Subiectf. And for a demonstracon of o r favorable inclynation 
towardf yo u , and embracinge of yo r loue & freindshipp, wee haue 
sent yo u atoken by o r servant S r Henrie Middleton knight, 
Generall of this o r voyadge, w ch wee pray yo u to accept in good 
parte, and to hono r and respect him accordinge to the quallity of 
his place. Given at o r Pallace of Westminst 1 ' this &c: 



FTER 3 my hartie Comendacons wheras the Companye 
of mfchantf trading to the East Indyes, being now 
buylding a Shippe in Ireland, and hauing occasion to 
vse some readye monye, for prouiding of sundrie 
thingf ther, necessarye for the finishing of the said shippe haue 
made suite for lycense to transport from hence, 
transportacon of 3 oo the some of Thre hundred poundf sterling, Theis 
are therfore to wyll and require y u to suffer any 

1 i.e. Neira, one of the Banda Islands. 

2 The loss of the 1610-14 Court Book prevents the giving of details as to the 
circumstances under which this warrant was applied for. It is interesting as an 
example of the strictness of the currency laws of the period. 

I B I 





356 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

psons aucthorized by the to shippe forth the said some of Thre 
hundred poundf . Prouided that y u take bond for deliu r ye of the 
said mony in Ireland, ther to be employed as aforesaid. And 
for so doing this (being grounded vppo his ma^ warrant vnto me 
in that behalf) shalbe yo r sufficyent discharge, ffrom Whitehall 
the 4 of OctoBr 1610. 

Yo r louing friend 

To my louinge friendf, the R SALISBURYE 



I AMES, 1 by the grace of God, king of England, Fraunce 
and Ireland, defend 1 of the faith &c. TO our trustye 
and welbeloued seru a nt Henry Myddleton knight, 
Greting. WHERAS, dyuers of o 1 ' louing subiectf, 
by the name of the Gouerno and Companye of Marchants of London 
trading into the East Indyes, at ther owne aduen- 
btaK'STHSS tures, costf and charge, for the hono 1 ' of this o r 
Realme of England, and for the encrease and 
aduauncement of trade, and nV'chandize w th in the same, haue set 
forth sundrie voyagf to the East Indies, and alreadye discouered 
and begunne to settle a trade into those part?, and intending the 
contynuinge therof, aswell by frequenting those placf alreadye 
setled, as by furth r discouerye of other partf , w ch may be fitt for 
the enterchaunging of the Comodityes of our kingdomes, w th the 
Comodityes of those place, such as may be of splall vse and 
benefitte to vs and o 1 ' subiectf, hauing to this purpose now 
p r pared and sett forth thre Shippes to the said East Indyes, and 
the placf adioyning therunto AND WHERAS our said 
Subiectf the Aduenture 1 ' 8 of those voyagf, haue chosen y 11 , our said 
seru"nt Henry Myddleton knight, to be y e principal! Gouerno 1 ' or 
Generall of all the m r chantf , maryners and oth r our Subiectf, w ch 
are or shalbe shipped in the said thre Shippes, WE graciouslye 
fauouring the 1 ' intended voyage, and approuinge and allowinge of 

1 The original and duplicate of this commission (with the remains of the Great 
Seal still attached) are preserved among the Parchment Records (Nos. 6 and 7) in the 
India Office. There are also Minutes of the Grant at the Public Record Office 
(see Cal. of State Papers, E. Indies, 1513-1616, p. 205). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 357 

ther choice of y n to the same gouernm 1 , being wylling to furnishe y u 
w th all fitt and conuenyent power and aucthoritye, to rule & gouerne 
all and euerye our Subiectf , employed in this voyage, by a due 
obedyence to be by them yeilded vnto yo 11 in the obseruinge and 
executing of all such good orders, and constitucons, as y u shall 
thinke conuenyent to ordeine and make for the furtheraunce of 
y c said voiage according to such pticier direccons and enstruccons, 
as y 11 shall receiue from y e said Gouerno 1 ' and Companye of 
nV'chantC , the Aduenturers in this voyage, Straightlye charging 
and comaunding all and euerye pson or psons employed in this 
voyage, and shipped in the said thre Shippes, to giue all due 
obedyence and respect vnto y 11 during the said voyage, and to 
beare themselues one toward^ anoth 1 ' in good ord 1 ' and quyetnes 
for auoyding any occasion that might breede. mutinye, quarrells 
or dissencon amongst them, to the hinderaunce of the good 
successe, w ch is to be hoped for by Godf prouidence of this said 
voyage. AND in default of such duitie and obedyence to be 
pfourmed toward^ y u , for the correcting and quenching of all such 
mutinyes, quarrells or dissencons that may arise, by the euyll and 
disorderlye disposicon of any pson whatsoeuer, WE do herbye 
aucthorize y u our said seru a nt Henry Middleton knight during the 
said voyage, or during so long tyme as y 11 shall Hue in the said 
voyage, to chastice correct and punishe all Offendo 1 ' 3 and trans- 
gressors in that behalf according to the qualitye of ther offences, 
w tk such punishm^ as are comonlye vsed in all Armyes at Sea, 
when they are not Capitall. AND for Capitall offencf as wilfull 
murth 1 ', w ch is hatefull in the sight of god, or mutinye w ch is an 
offence w ch may tend to the ouerthrowe of the said voyage, the 
same being dulye and iustlye proued against any of the son 
or psons aforesaid. WE do herby giue vnto y u o r said seru n nt 
Henry Myddleton knight, during all the tyme of the said voyage, 
or during so long tyme as y 11 shall Hue in the said voyage, full 
power and aucthoritye to vse and put in execucon our lawe, called 
Lawe Marciall in that behalf, And these our ires shalbe vnto y 11 
sufficyent "arrant and discharge, for the doing and executing of 
all and singier the p r misses. AND forasmuch as at this p r sent 
tyme, we are in amitye w th all Christian Princes, and are 
vnwylling that any o r Subiectf should giue occasion of breach or 



358 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

hinderaunce therof toward any o r Confederates friendf or Allyes, 
And because we are not ignoraunt of the emulacon and enuye 
w ch doth accompanye the discouerye of Countryes and trades, and 
of the quarrells and contencons w ch do many tymes fall out 
betwene the Subiectf? of dyuers Princes when they mete the one 
w tL the oth r in forreigne and farre remote Countryes in prosecuting 
the course of the r discoueries, and being desirous that our 
Subiectf should forbeare to moue or beginne any quarrell or con- 
tencon vppo the SubiectC of o r Confederates friend^ or Allies, 
eith r in ther going forth or retourning from any of ther voyage 
WE THERFORE do herebye straightlye charge and comaund y u 
o r said seru a nt Henrye Myddleton knight, and all other vnder yo r 
gouernm 1 , that neith r in yo r voyage outward or homeward, or 
in any Countrye, Island, Port or place, wher y u shall abyde or 
come, during the tyme of yo r being abroad, out of o 1 ' king- 
domes or domynions, wher y u meete w th any the Subiectf of y e 
king of Spaine, or of any oth r o r Confederates, friendf , or Allies, 
or of any other nacon or people, ther Shippes, Vessells, goodf or 
m r chandizes, y u do not attempt or go about to sett vppo, take or 
surprize their psons, Shippes, vessells, goodf or m r chandizes, or 
offer any iniurye or discourtesye vnto them, as y u wyll aunswer 
the contrarye, at yo r vtt r most pills. Except y u shalbe by them 
first therunto iustlye puoked or driue, eith r in the iust defence of 
yo r owne psons, Shippes, vessells, goodf or m r chandizes, by any 
ther disturbaunce or hinderaunce v^soeu 1 " in yo r quyett course of 
trade, or for recompence and recou r ye of the psons, Shippes, goodf 
or m r chandizes of any o r Subiectf, that are alreadye in or neare 
the East Indyes, or for any oth r iust cause of yo r defence, In w ch 
cases so excepted, if y u attempt, surprize, and take the psons, 
Shippes and goodf of any Prince or State, by whose Subiectf y u 
shall susteine any wrong, or losse in manner as aforesaid, y u shall 
not for any such acte or actf , grounded vppo the occasions aboue 
menconed, be in daung r or subiect to the pill and penalties of o r 
lawes, Alwayes p r supposing and so requiring y u to vse all possible 
endeuo 13 by all meanes whatsoeu r , to suffer no spoile to be made 
of any goodf or m r chandizes, nor imbeaseling of any thing what- 
soeu r that shalbe recou r ed by y u , but to see the saufelye brought 
home w th ther Bylles of lading and Chart r pties, to the intent that 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 359 

there may be restitucon made by vs, so soone as y u shall receiue 
satisfaccon from that State or people, by whome y u are damp- 
nifyed of what Natio soeuer. AND forasmuch as o r said Subiectf 
the m r chant and oth r the Aduenture rs of this voyadge, out of 
prouydence and foresight yf any mortalitye eith r by sicknes or 
otherwise (w ch God forbyd) should befall vnto o r seru a nt Henry 
Myddleton knight, haue made choise of o r trustie and louing 
subiecte Cap ne Nichas Dounton, to succeede the said Henry 
Myddleton knight, in the charge and comaund of principall 
Gouerno r or Gen r all of all the psons employed in this voyage as 
aforesaid WE do alsoe (in case such an accydent should 
happen) allowe and approue of ther choyce in that behalf, And 
do herby giue full power and aucthoritye to the said Cap 116 
Nichas Dounton, to do and execute all and euerye thing, incydent 
to the charge of principall Gouerno r or Generall of all the psons 
employed in this voyage as aforesaid in as ample manner and 
forme, and to all intentf and purposes, as is before comytted and 
imposed vppo our Seru a nt Henrye Mydleton knight, And these 
o r ires shalbe also sufncyent warrant and discharge to the said 
Cap ne Nichas Dounton, for the doing and executing of all and 
singuler the p r misses as afores d . IN WYTNES wherof we haue 
caused these o r tres to be made Patent? . WITNES our self at 
Westm the seauententh day of March in the seauenth yeare of 
our Raigne of England, Fraunce and Ireland, and of Scotland the 
thre and forteth 

per breue de priuato Sigillo . C O P P I N . 




[AMES, 1 by the grace of God, king of England, Scot- 
land, ffraunce and Ireland, defend 1 of the faith &c 
TO OUR trustye and welbeloued Anthony e Hipponf 
greting, WHERAS dyuers of our louing subiectf, 
by the name of the Gouern r and Companye of m r chant of 

1 Captain Hippon's Commission for the Seventh Voyage, 1611 (see also Cal. of State 
Papers, E. Indies, 1513-1616, page 208). 
3 See page 114, note 3. 



360 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



Londo, trading into the East Indyes, at ther 
owne aduentures costf and charges, for the 
hono r of this o r Realme of England, and for the encrease 
arid aduancem* of trade, and m'chandize w th in the same, 
haue set forth sundrie voyagf to the East Indyes, and alreadye 
discouered, and begunne to settle a trade into those part^, 
and intending the contynuinge therof, aswell by frequenting 
those ptf alreadie setled, as by furth r discouerye of oth r ptc w dl 
may be fitt, for ent r chaunging of the Comodityes of o r king- 
domes, w th the comodityes of those placf, such as may be of 
speciall vse and benefitte to vs and o r subiectf, hauing to this 
purpose now p r pared and sett forth the good Shippe called the 
Globe, AND wheras our said subiectf, the Aduenture rs of those 
voyagf , haue chosen y u the said Anthony e Hippo, to be Gouerno r or 
Captaine of all the m r chantf, maryners, and all oth rs , as well our 
Subiectf , as of what Natio soeu r that shall goe in the said Shippe, 
we graciouslye fauouring the intended voyage, and approuing 
and allowing of ther choyce of y u to the same gouernm*, being 
wylling to furnishe y u w th all fytt and conuenyent power & 
aucthoritye, to rule and gouerne all and euerye our Subiectf and 
others whatsoeu 1 ', employed in this voyage by a due obedyence 
to be by the yeilded vnto y u in the obseruing and executing of 
all such good orders and constitucons as y u shall thinke con- 
uenyent to ordeine and make for the furtheraunce of the said 
voyage, according to such pticter direccons and enstruccons as y u 
shall receiue from the said Gouerno r and Companye of m r chantf 
the Aduenture 1 ' 3 in this voyage, Straightlye charging and 
comaunding all and eu r ye pson and psons employed in this 
voyage, and shipped in the said Shippe to giue all due obedy- 
ence and respect vnto y u , during the said voyage, And to beare 
themselues one towardf anoth r in good order and quietnes, for 
auoyding any occasion that might breede mutinye, quarrells or 
dissencons amongst the to the hinderaunce of the good successe, 
w ch is to be hoped for, by godf puidence of this said voyage 
AND in default of such duitye and obedyence to be pfourmed 
toward^ y u , for the correcting and quenching of all such 
mutinyes, quarrells and dissencons, that may arise by the euyll 
and disorderlye disposicon of any pson whatsoeu 1 ', we do herbye 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 361 

aucthorize y 11 , our said subiect Anthony e Hippon, during the said 
voyage, or during so long tyme as y u shall lyue in the said 
voyage, to chastize correct and punishe all offend 1 ' 8 and trans- 
gresso rs in that behalf according to the qualitye of ther offencf ; 
w th such punishing as are comonlye vsed in all armyes at Sea, 
when they are not capitall, And for Capitall offencf, or 1 wilfull 
murth 1 ', (w ch is hatefull in the sight of god) or mutynie, (w dl is an 
offence which may tend to the ouerthrowe of the said voyadge) 
the same being iustlye and ' dulye proued, against any of the 
pson or psons aforesaid WEE do hereby giue vnto y u o r said 
subiect Anthony e Hippon, during all the tyme of the said voyage, 
or during so long tyme, as y u shall lyue in the said voyage, full 
power and aucthoritye to vse and put in execucon our Lawe 
called Lawe Martiall in that behalf, and these o r ires shalbe yo r 
sufficyent warrant, and discharge for the doing and executing all 
and singter the p r misses. AND forasmuch as at this pnt tyme we 
are in Amitye w th all xpian princf , and are vnwylling that any o r 
Subiectf, should giue occasio of breach or hinderaunce therof, 
toward any o r confedera*f , friend f or allyes, And because y u2 
are not ignoraunt of the emulacon and enuye w dl doth accom- 
panye the discouerye of Countryes, and Trades, and of the 
quarrells and contencons w ch do many tymes fall out betwene the 
Subiectf of dyuers Princf when they meete the one w th the oth r 
in forreigne and farre remote Countryes, in psecuting the course 
of ther discoueryes ; and being desirous that o r Subiectf should 
forbeare or 3 beginne to 3 moue any quarrells or contencons, vppo 
the subiectf of o r confederatf, friendf or allyes, eith 1 ' in ther 
going forth or retourning from any the voyagf WEE therfore do 
straightlye charge and comaund y u , o r said subiect Anthony e 
Hippon, and all oth r vnder yo r gouernm*, That neith 1 ' in yo r 
voyage outward or homeward, or in any Countrye, Island, Port 
or place, wher y u shall abide or come during the tyme of yo r 
being abroad out of o r kingdome or domynions, wher y u meete 
w tu any the Subiectf of the king of Spayne, or of any oth r o r Con- 
federates, friendf or Allyes, or of any oth r Natio or people, ther 
shippes, vessells, goodf or m r chandizes, yow do not attempt or 

1 A mistake for " as." 2 This should be " we." 

3 These two words appear to have been transposed in copying. 



362 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

go about to sett vppo, take or surprize, ther psons, shippes, 
vessells, good? or m r chandizes, or offer any Iniurye or dis- 
courtesye vnto the, as y u wyll aunswer the contrarye at yo r vtter- 
most pills Except y u shalbe by them first therunto puoked or 
drawne, eith r in the iust defence of yo r owne psons, shippes, 
vessells, good? or m r chandize, by any their disturbaunce or 
hinderaunce w'soeu* in yo r quiett course of trade, or for recom- 
pence, and recouerye of y e psons, shippes, goodf , or m r chandizes 
of any o r Subiect? that are alreadie in or neare the East Indyes, 
Or for any oth r iust cause of yo r defence, In w ch causes so 
excepted, if y u attempt, surprize and take, the psons shippes and 
good? of any Prince or State, by whose Subiectf y u shall susteyne, 
any wrong or losse in manner as aforesaid, y u shall not for any 
such Act or Act?, (grounded vppo the occasions aboue menconed,) 
be in daung r or subiect to the pill and penaltyes of o r Lawes, 
Alwayes p r supposing, and so requiring y u to vse all possible 
endeuo by all meanes whatsoeu r , to suffer no spoyle to be made, 
of any good? or m r chandizes nor embezilling of any good? 
whatsoeu 1 " that shalbe recou r ed by y u , But to see them saufelye 
brought home, w th ther bylles of lading, and Chart r pties, to the 
intent that there may be restitucon made by vs so soone as y u 
shall receyue satisfaccon from that State or people, by whome 
y u are dampnifyed, of what Natio soeu r AND forasmuch as o r 
said Subiect?, the m r chant? and other the Aduenture" of this 
voyage, out of prouydence and foresight of any mortalitye, eith r 
by sicknes or otherwise, w ch god forbyd should befall, vnto our 
Subiect Anthony e Hyppon, haue made choyce of o r trustie and 
welbeloued Subiect Robert Browne, 1 to succede the said Anthony e 
Hyppon in y e charge and comaund of Gouerno 1 " and Captaine of 
all the psons employed in this voyage WEE do also in case 
such an accydent should happe allowe and approue of ther 
choyce in that behalf, And do herby giue full power and 
aucthoritye to the said Robert Browne, to do and execute all and 
euerye thing incydent to the charge of Gouerno r and Cap ne of all 
the psons employed in this voyage, as aforesaid, in as ample 
manner and forme, vnto all intent? and purposes, as is before 
comytted and imposed vppo o r Subiect Anthonye Hyppon, And 

1 See page 52, note x. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 363 

these o r Ires shalbe also a sufficyent warrant and discharge to the 
said Robert Browne, for y e doing and executing of all and singier 
the p r misses as aforesaid IN WYTNES whereof, we haue 
caused these o r tres to be made Patent?, WYTNES our self 
at Westmynstcr, the fourth day of Decernbr, in the Eight yeare of 
our Raigne of England Frauncc & Ireland, and of Scotland the 
fower and fortith. 

COPPIN 
Per breue de priuato Sigillo 




Articles indented & agreed vpon the thirtenth day 
of Decemfe in the yeare of o r Lord 1610. Betweene 
S r Thomas Smyth knight Gou r no r of the Company of 
Marchaunt? of London, tradeinge to the East Indies, 
and Certeine Committees of that Company appointed 
by order of Courte for that purpose, on thone parte. 
And Peter Ploris & Lucas Athewmes, 1 Dutch Marchaunt? 
on thother parte. In manner & forme followinge. 

NPRIMIS. Itt is agreed that a shipp shall be prouided 
by the said Gou r no r and Companie of the burthen of 
fower hundred Tunns or thereabout? To be readie 
to sett saile from hence in this instant Decemb, or 
in lanuarie next, w th fower score men (Marchaunt? & all others) 
& victualled for thirtie monnethes for a voyadge (by god? grace) 
to be made therew th into the said East Indies. 

Item : ffor the pformance thereof, as alsoe for a competent 

1 Peter Floris (here miswritten Ploris) and Lucas Antheumis (or Antheunis) were 
two Dutch merchants to whom was entrusted the management of the Company's Seventh 
Voyage (1611), which was especially intended to open up trade on the Coromandel 
Coast and at Patani and Siam. Probably both of them and certainly Floris had had 
experience of trade in the Indies ; and, as will be seen from the present document, 
they had a considerable stake in the enterprise, contributing one-eighth of the total 
capital. The voyage proved to be a success, but was fatal to Floris, who died within 
two months of his return to London (1615). Antheumis, who had been left at Siam, 
remained there until September, 1615, when he proceeded to Patani, and thence to 
Masulipatam, finally reaching London in September, 1618. 



364 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

stocke of I200O U or thereaboutes is appointed to be leuied, 
whereof I50o li is to be putt into the said stocke by the foresaid 
Peter Ploris & Lucas Antheumes for their aduenture And 6oo li 
of the said i5oo H , is by them presentlie to be paid, to such a 
Casheare as shalbe therevnto by the said Gou r no r & Companie 
chosen And the other goo 11 to be likewise paid to the said 
Chasheare in lime or lulie next follovvinge the date of theis 
presentes (w ch the said Companie doe acknowledge to haue 
receiued). The rest of the said stocke of I2ooo u is to be supplied 
by the said Company. 

Item. That of the foresaid I2ooo u intended for the said 
stocke, the chardge of the Shippe, victuallinge & such other 
necessaries shalbe supplied, & then the Remainder of the said 
some shall be imployed as a stocke by them for this voyadge. 

Item. That the said Pieter Ploris, Lucas Atheumcs & Robert 
Browne shall be the principall ffactors for sale & imploym' of the 
said stocke, duringe the said voyadge, And that whatsoeuer 
shalbe by them bought or sould in the tyme of this their said 
voyadge shalbe registred and written by some English Marchauntf 
to be appointed by the said Gou r no r & Companie for that purpose. 
And alsoe the said Pieter Ploris, & Lucas Atheumes doe promyse 
that they will neither buie nor sell any Marchaundize or 
Comodities whatsoeu r , nor make any priuate, nor any other 
bgaines before hand, but such and att those tymes when the said 
Robert Browne; and other Englishe Marchauntf shall be by att 
the makeinge of them. Promysinge further to vse their best dilli- 
gence & endevo" to informe teach & enstruct the said Englishe 
Marchauntf in all the misteries & secreete belonginge to the said 
trade and busines. 

Item. The said Pieter Ploris & Lucas Athemmes doe promyse 
that they will not intermeddle nor haue any dealinges w th any 
other busines then buyinge & sellinge of Marchaundize & such 
other Comodities w th out the Consent of the Captaine and Robert 
Browne w th the rest of the said English Marchaunt^: Nor w th 
setlinge any ffactory in any place, or w th any state whatsoeu 1 ' w th out 
the Consent & resolucon first had of the said Capt & englishe 
MarchauntC as aforesaid. Prouided & yt is agreed that the said 
Capt & englishe MarchauntC shall cause the shipp to sayle, & 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 365 

direct their course to all such hauens and portes as the said Pieter 
Ploris & Lucas Atheumes shall from tyme to tyme direct them 
vnto. 

Item The money and Merchandize appointed for the 
foresaid stocke shall be m r ked w th the Companies marke, & 
remaine in the Custodie and chardge of the said Captaine & 
english Marchauntes vntill there be tyme of ymploym*, and then 
to be deliu r ed to the said Pieter Ploris, Lucas A ntheumes & Robert 
Browne as occasion shall serue, and by them required. And att 
what tyme soeu r the said Merchandize, or any 
parte thereof shall be sould & ymployed in other 
wares & goodf the same shall presentlie be 
brought abourd & putt into the hould of the said 
shipp (marked w th the said Companies marke 
expressed in the margent). And this to be done 
as often as any chaunge, sale or ymploym* shall 
be made of the said wares good or marchandize. 
And due accomptf to be kept by the said englishe 
Marchauntf from tyme to tyme of the doinge 
thereof, soe as the Gou r nor & Company (for the tyme beinge) 
may receiue true informacon of eu v y pticuler buyinge and 
sellinge w th the places where the same was done, & the tymes 
when. 

Item Thatt for the doinge & pformaunce of this busines the 
said Gou r nor & Company doe promise to allowe to the said 
Pieter Ploris and Lucas Anthumes, for their factorie vpon the nette 
pceede of the said stocke (Marriners wages & all other chardges 
.deducted [)] as followeth. 

If there be vnder Centum p Cento, nette proffitt made, by the 
said voyadge, then they are to receiue noe factorage. 

If there be Centum p Cento nette proffitt made as for example 
24000" for I2000 11 then they are to haue 4 p Centu. 

If one hundred and a halfe be made, nett proffitt vpon the 
hundred as 3oooo u for laooo 11 then they are to haue 5 p Cent. 

If Twoe hundred be made nette proffitt vpon the hundred as 
36ooo u for i20oo li then they are to haue 6 p Cent. 

If twoe hundred & a halfe be made nette proffitt vpon the 
hundred as 420OO 11 for I2O00 11 then they are to haue 7 p Centu. 



3 66 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

If three hundred be made nette proffitt vpon the hundred as 
48000" for I2ooo u then they are to haue 8 p Centu. 

If three hundred & a halfe be made nette promtt vpon the 
hundred as 54OOO U for i2Ooo h then they are to have 9 p Centu. 

If ffower hundred be made nette pffitt vpon the hundred as 
6oooo u for I2000 11 then they are to haue 10 p Centu. And noe 
more what increase soeu r they shall retourne of proffitt or gaine, 
they shall haue noe more then 10 p Centu. 

Item That duringe the said voyadge they shall neither by 
themselues, nor any other for them or to their vse directlie or 
indirectlie, vse or exercise any priuate trade or Marchandizeinge 
whatsoeu r But shall applie themselues & their whole endevo" 
for the good & aduancm 1 of the gen r all stocke, And the said 
Gou r nor & Companie, doe promise to vse their best care 
& diligence to p r uent the like priuate trade or Marchandizinge to 
be made by the said Captaine, englishe Marchauntf or any other 
Marriners whatsoeu r . 

Item that the said Peter Ploris & Lucas Antheumes shall 
become bound vnto the said Gou r nor & Comp : in 2OOO li for their 
true & faithfull dealeinge w th the said Gou r nor & Comp : in the 
said voyadge, and for the due pformance of whatt is for them to 
be pformed abouesaid. As alsoe for the deliu r inge vp in writeinge 
of a true and iust accompt of all there pceedingf in the said 
voyadge. 

Item yf God shall call the said Peter Floris & Lucas A theumes 
out of this lyfe, before that they shall retourne backe into the 
porte of London, then the benefitt of their factorage as abouesaid, 
and nette pceede of their aduenture pporcionablie w th the rest of 
the Aduenturers shall be trulie paid and satisfied vnto their heires 
Executors or Administrators. 

Item yt is further agreed That yf the said Peter Floris or the 
said Lucas Antheumes or either of them doe fortune to die, & 
the other retourne that then the suruiuo r shall stand for both, & 
be accomptable in the behalfe of both, for all that hath past in 
the said voyadge accordinge to the true meaneinge of theis 
Articles. 

Item. Whereas certaine Articles of Agreem* were made and 
concluded, betwixt the said S r : Thomas Smyth Gou r nor of the 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 367 

said Companie &c : on the one parte : And Peter Floris & Lucas 
Antheumes on thother parte bereinge date the 27 th day of March 
1610. for c r teine couenantf to haue beene pformed on either 
parte : Itt is nowe agreed vpon that the said Articles shall be 
disannulled and cancelled, & whatsoeu r is conteyned in them to 
be of noe strength nor power. 

In Witnes whereof the said Pieter Floris and Lucas Antheumes 
haue sett to their handf and scales to thone parte, and the said 
Companie haue fixed their Comon seale vnto theis present^ to 
thother parte the day & yeare first aboue written 

Whereas mention is made in the precedent Articles of a 
stocke of 12000" to be ymployed by the foresaid Pieter Floris & 
Lucas Antheumes, for w dl they are to receiue factorie accordinge to 
the said Articles of agreem* betwixt the Companie and them ; 
They nowe findinge that by the increase of chardges the Capitall 
will be raysed vnto 14000" or thereaboutes, doe desier that the 
Companie would be pleased to graunt them consideracon in there 
factorye for the said encrease, w ch the Company are willinge to 
yeald vnto in manner and forme followinge as is sett downe 
(accordinge to their owne desier) on thother side of this Roll. Viz. as 
followeth. 

Pieter Floris : Lucas Antheumes : 

Consideringe that the settinge forth of the Shipp cometh to 
more then was att the first supposed yt would haue done, In 
reguard whereof the Capitall is encreased w th Marchandize and 
money to 14000" or thereabout? : Wee therefore the Gou r nor 
Deputy & Comittees for the foresaid Companie (att the earnest 
request of the forenamed Peter Floris and Lucas Antheumes) are 
willinge and contented for their satisfaccon to graunt that there 
promtio and factorie shall be reckoned as followeth. 

If they bring in retourne the nette some of 24000" then there 
promtio shall begyn att 4 p Centu, and soe to Continue to 29000" 

Butt yf it soe happen that they bringe in nette retourne 30000" 
or aboue the same some shall be diuided by 12000", & the promtio 
to be reckoned as aforesaid. 

And in like manner the same some shall be diuided by 14000" 



368 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

or as much as the nette Capitall shall come vnto & the promtio 
reckoned pro rato of I2ooo u . 

Nowe the difference betweene the twoe pmtions shall be 
equally diuided thone halfe to Peter Floris & Lucas Antheumes & 
thother halfe to the Companie. 

Example* 

I20OO 11 make 33Ooo u is 2\ proffitt the pintion 5 p Cent is i65O u 
14000" make 33OOO U is 2 proffitt, the promtio 4 p Centii is y 1 1320" 



The difference is y 330 



thone halfe is y 165 

This 165 must be added to the 1320", or els substracted from 
1650 & then our promtion for 33OOo u wilbe 1485^ 

A n other Example. 

I2OOO 11 make 58ooo li is 4! proffitt the promtio 9 p Cent is y 522O H . 
I40OO 1 ' make 58ooo u is fower proffitt the promtio 8 p Cent i 



The difference is 580" 
Thone halfe is y 290 

This 29O 11 must be added to 4640", or els substracted from 
522o u and then o r promtio for 58000" wilbe y 493o u . 

Lucas Antheumes 
Peter Floris. 

1 In the absence of any definite information as to its nature and meaning, the 
symbol which in the original occurs here has been printed as a "y ", the modern 
(written) form of that letter giving perhaps the best idea of its shape. What it really 
is, and what its significance, are questions to which, in spite of much kind help from 
Mr. Jeayes (of the British Museum), Mr. Noel Sainsbury (of the Public Record 
Office), Mr. F. G. Hilton Price (of Child's Bank), and others, no answer can yet be 
given. Some experts consider it an " n " with the tail turned up (meaning " nett " or 
some similar word) ; others hold it to be a contraction for videlicet ; others again regard 
it as a "z", or some conventional sign for money. Bearing in mind the nationality of 
the writers, it may be conjectured that it is an old Dutch mercantile symbol, perverted 
possibly beyond recognition by the ignorance o-f the copyist. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 369 

A Comission 1 graunted by vs the Gou r nor Deputy 
& Comittees, for the Company of Marchauntf of 
London, tradeinge [into] the East Indies vnto Anthony 
Hippon Capt Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes & Rofot 
Browne o r principal! ffactors, together w th Thomas 
Essington, 2 Symon Evans, Adam Denton, & George 
Chauncey the rest of o 1 ' ffactors and all other o r Marriners 
employed in this o r seaventh voyadge in the good shipp 
called the Globe. 

[NPRIMIS Whereas wee the Marchauntf abouesaid 
w th O r g r eate chardge & trouble haue prepared a 
shipp called the Globe, for a voyadge by Godf grace 
in her to be made to the bay of Bengala & other 
places in att or aboute the East Indies, & haue furnished the 
same in sufficient & plentifull manner, w th men, 
tackle, victualls, & all other needfull puicons, fitt 
f r suc h a voyadge. And haueinge beene pswaded 
by the good reporte of dyvers, & alsoe of an 
espetiall trust and confidence wee haue of the integritie, wisdome 
and resolucons of o r loueinge freindf Anthonie Hippon, Peter 
Floris, Lucas Antheumes & Rofet Browne Doe appointe and autho- 
rize the said Anthonie Hippon to be o r cheefe Captaine & master, 
duringe the said voyadge, & to comaund o r shipp w th the men & 
Marrin r s att Sea, And Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes & Robt 
Browne, our principall ffactors & Cape Marchauntf for the 
orderinge disposeinge of such moneys goodf & Marchandize 
on shore, as shall be carried alonge w th them in the said shipp. 
And Thomas Essington, Symon Evans, Adam Denton & George 
Chauncey, wee appointe to take their passadge in the said 
shipp as o r ffactors to keepe bookes & accomptf of all goodf & 

1 This commission, though apparently completed and communicated to those 
concerned, seems to have been superseded by a fresh draft, which will be found on 
page 379. Possibly Floris and Antheumis were dissatisfied with it in its present 
form. 

2 Of this band of factors, Essington, on the death of Hippon in July, 1612, became 
captain of the Globe, and held that post until his death at Masulipatam in May, 1614 ; 
Denton became in turn chief at Patani and at Masulipatam, returning home in 1621 ; 
and Chauncey, after being stationed at various factories, died at Patani in the autumn 
of 1615. 

I C 



370 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Marchandize sould and delyuered, and bought and receiued from 
tyme to tyme w th the names of the portes, where any such trade 
or traffique is made. All w ch both Commanders MarchauntC 
{factors and Marriners wee trust will soe carrie them selues w th 
due respect one to another, loue to their equalls & obedyence to 
their Superio as loue & kindnes may be contynued on all sides, 
and all whollie applie their wittf and endevo" for the due pform- 
aunce of this voyadge in the best manner they may for the good 
of the Companie. 

2 Item for that religious gou'nm* doth best binde men to 
pforme their duties, It is principally to be cared for, that prayers 
be said eu r y Morninge & eueninge in the Shippe, & the whole 
Company called therevnto w th dilligent Eyes that none be 
wantinge, soe as all may ioyntlie w th reuerence and humilitie pray 
vnto Almightie God to blesse & preserue them from all dangers in 
this longe and tedious voyadge And for that purpose wee haue 
deliu r ed vnto the purser a faire Bible, w th the booke of Comon 
prayers. 

3 Item That noe blasphemeinge of God, sweareinge, theft, 
drunkennes, or other like misdeameano be vsed, butt that the 
same be seuerelie ponished & that noe diceinge or other vnlawfull 
games be pmitted for that the same are most comonlie the 
begynninges of quarrells, and many times murther a iust occasion 
of Godf wrath and vengeance from w ch the lord deliuer vs all. 
Wherefore wee doe order that the Captaine shall puide ponishm^ 
to be sett vp & published in the said shipp for such offences, 
whereby eu r y man may take notice what he ought to avoied. 

4 Item. Thatt noe liquor be spilt in the ballast of the shipp, 
or filthines be left w tL in bourd w ch in heate breedeth noysome 
smells, and infeccon : Butt that the ou r lopps and other places of 
the shipp be kept cleane & sweete w ch is a notable preseruacon 
of health 

5 Item That contynuall & true lournalls be kept of eu r y 
dayes course & nauigacon duringe the whole voyadge, w th the 
obseruacon of fallinge w th eu r y Coaste & land, or porte where 
they come, for the depth of water, & in what latitude yt lyeth, 
w th true relacon of eu r y thinge that passeth And this to be done 
seu r ally by Captaine ffactors, Pylott, M rs mate and purser And 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 371 

they att conuenient tyme to conferr together aboute the same, 
To thend that yf any of them haue forgotten what an other 
obserued the same may be added whereby a discourse may be 
sett downe, to be presented by the Captaine to the Gou r nor and 
Company, when God shall graunte the said shipp safe retourne. 

6. Item Thatt all money & Marchandizes w ch shall be shipt 
here by the Gou r nor and Companie shall be kept by the Captaine 
he giueinge a receipt for the same w ch said receipt shall be kept 
by Peter Floris Lucas Antheumes and Robt Browne thereby to 
demand the said money & goodf when they shall come to those 
places, where they shall vse the same And then the same shall 
be deliu r ed ouer by the Captaine vnto them from tyme to tyme 
duringe the said voyadge. 

7 Item Wee will that the Captaine shall cause the Boates 
or Sciffes to be alwaies in a readines to be ymployed to all such 
places as o r principall MarchauntC shall appointe them, And not 
to dispose of them any otherwyse soe longe as they shall haue 
occasion to vse them. 

8 Item such Marchandize wares & money as the Capt shall 
deliu r into the handes of the principall Marchauntf he shall take 
a receipt from them thereof: And such wares and Marchandize 
as shall be brought into the shipp by the foresaid principall 
Marchaunt^ Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes & Rofet Browne (or 
such as shall succeede in their places) beinge marked w th the 
Companies marke, they shall take a receipt of the Capt for the 
same. And this shall be done soe often as any goodf shall be 
dischardged forth of the shipp, or laden into the shipp, And the 
Captaine to be carefull that the goodf be well preserued & kept 
drie. To w ch end he shall haue espetiall care to looke often tymes 
vnto the overloppe, that ytt be well kept. 

9 Item the principall Marchauntf shall not doe any thinge 
(w ch is w th out the compasse of their tradeinge) w th out the Coun- 
saile of the Capt & other ffactors whether yt be in setlinge of any 
factory, or any contract or agreement to be made w th any kinge 
or potentate in the Indies Neither shall the Captaine haue any 
comaund or authoritie on the land to haue any thinge to doe w th 
the trade of Marchandizeinge Butt therein whollie wee doe 
authorize & put in trust o r principall Marchauntf Peter Floris, 

i c i 



372 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Lucas Antheumes & Rofot Browne to be cheefe Comanders on the 
land, to thend they may pforme the busines accordinge to their 
owne inuention. And Thomas Essington, Symon Evans, Adam 
Denton, and George Chauncey shall be w th them to assist them 
both in keepinge the bookes of accomptes as alsoe the Cashe. 

10 Item yf the principall Marchauntf shall haue occasion to 
vse 5 or 6 Marriners or more to helpe to watch and keepe the 
goode on Land in their howses, then yo u Capt Anthonie Hippon 
shall (vpon their demand) lett them haue soe many as they shall 
need, and those of the best and trustiest men yo u haue. 

11 Item To the end that the voyadge be not hindred 
through want of victualls, Wee doe ordeyne and requier that 
the Captaine shall not alter the daylie allowance of victualls, 
w th out first haueinge taken Counsell & consent of o r principall 
Marchauntf, Whoe shall keepe Counter bookes of all the 
Victualls that are spent, and that shall remaine in Esse, the better 
to make their reckoninge for their pceedinge in the voyadge. 
And when yo u shall come vnto the Land then shall the victualls 
be lockt vp in the shipp, and the principall Marchauntf shall 
puide fresh victualls from the land, the better to enlardge the 
store, yf any may be pcured. 

12 Item. That att any place where yo u shall water, and 
refresh yo r selues, or putt in for traffique and Marchandizeinge, 
you Capt Anthonie Hippon shall call the whole Companie together 
giueinge them most strict & straight chardge and warninge not 
to straggle, but to behaue them selues peaceablie and Ciuillie 
toward^ the people of that place, (yf any be there) the better to 
pcure their freindshipp, towardf the supplie of yo r wantf, and in 
yo r course of trade least the losse of yo r Hues and ou r throwe of 
o r voyadge pay for yo r disorders, beside an vtter discreditt to o r 
Nation, And that yo r men doe vse a discreete meane in eateinge 
of fruitf , fresh victualls, or drinkinge of water, leaste they surfett 
and fall into diseases, whereof wee haue had too much experience. 
But as any fresh prouisions shall be pcured a shore by our 
principall ffactors, the same shall be first brought vnto the 
Captaine (whoe w th there advise) shall reparte the same vnto the 
Company as to yo 11 shall seeme good and needfull : And none 
presume to doe contrary w u 'out seueare ponishm* And that 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 373 

espetiall care be had to releiue the sicke, w th such fresh meatf, 
and other Comfortable thinges, wherew th wee haue furnished yo r 
shipp for that purpose, and not otherwise to be spent in Ryott 
and banquettinge and soe the sicke pishe for wante of thingf 
needfull. 

13. Item Whereas the stragglinge of yo r men, in any place 
where they shall arryue and come, may not onlie proue the losse 
of such, as shall soe straggle (notw th standinge they should be 
armed) but alsoe thereby much hurte might happen to the 
residue of o 1 ' people. It is ordered that yo u doe not pmitt any 
man in any place to straggle or goe from the rest of yo r Com- 
panie vnlesse vpon some spetiall occasions yo u giue Warraunt 
therevnto, vpon paine of seueare ponishm* to be inflicted vpon 
such as shall doe the Contrarie, still doubtinge the worst and 
standinge vpon yo r guarde, w th out giueinge any trust vnto the 
people of the place. 

14 Item fforasmuch as wee are well pswaded, of the 
discrecon, circumspection & good vnderstandinge of o r principall 
Marchauntf Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes, and Rofet Browne. 
Wee doe therefore requier yo u Capt Anihonie Nippon that yo u be 
alwaies readie to saile to all such hauens and portes, as o r foresaid 
principall Marchauntf shall direct yo u to sayle vnto, and there to 
remayne vntill the said principall Marchauntf , shall haue finished 
there busines, & then from thence to saile vnto such other places 
as they shall requier yo 11 . And this shall be soe often by yo u 
pformed as they shall thinke fitt : for therein consisteth the 
welfare of the said voyadge And noe man shall counsaile or 
resolue to retourne homewardes, vntill such tyme as o r said 
principall Marchauntf shall haue fully finisht there intended 
trade, vpon forfecture of all their wages. 

15 Item It is expreslie ordered that by a generall Consent 
of yo 11 the Capt : Marchauntf , facto rs : and Marriners, some good 
order be by yo u taken, and sett downe in writinge, soe soone as 
yo u come to Sea, conc r ninge the disposeinge of dead mens goodf 
in the voyadge eyther by Comittinge the same by Inventory to 
the pticular keepinge of some men in the shipps (and that vpon 
some convenient considerations, for keepinge the same) or by sale 
of soe much thereof att the mayne maste as may not exceede a 



374 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

third parte of the buyers wages, for either buyinge or borroweinge, 
to preuent such preiudice to o r Company as wee haue felt by 
Marriners buyinge soe much, as there whole wages came vnto : 
whereby they haue not onlie forsaken o r shipps before their 
dischardge, butt alsoe depriued vs of meanes to redresse such 
wronges, as they haue many waies done vs in the voyadge. 
Alsoe that there be noe dealeinge by Exchange betwixt ptie and 
ptie, neither mony for mony, Comoditie for Comoditie Comoditie 
for money outwardes nor homewardes (for such exchange giues 
way for them to take and purloyne of o r goodf). ffor preuencon 
whereof, wee order That neither the purser (nor any other) doe 
register, witnes, or take knowledge of any such contract by 
exchange. And noe man to be admitted meanes, to bringe goodf 
abourd, vpon paine of forfecture to the Company of that w ch shall 
be soe brought in. And yf any ffactor shall happen to die, his 
bookf, accomptf, and other thinges are to be ordered by the 
Cap tne : & safelie reserued and brought home for England (an 
Inventory first taken thereof and registred in the pursers booke, 
to be witnessed by twoe or three others of the Companie[)]. 
And that eu r y Marriner or other in the shipp, doe sett there 
handes or marke to the said Orders mentioned in this I5th Article. 
16 Item To the end that all difficult matters may the better 
be passed over by good endevo rs wee doe appointt a Counsell of 
Eight psonns whereof Capt ne : Anthony Hippon to be Presedent 
(in matters of the shipp or for lustice) and Peter Floris, Lucas 
Antheumes & Robert Browne, w th Thomas Essington, Symon Euans 
Adam Denton, and George Chauncey (beinge in all eight psonns, 
whereof one of them to recorde whatt matters shall passe) shall 
be a sufficient Counsell to determyne, all cryminall & ciuill causes 
that shall come before them. Yett forasmuch as Peter Floris & 
Lucas Antheumes haue excused themselues thatt they are not 
acquaintted w th the losse 1 and lustice of o r land, therefore they 
shall be exempted & not required to come to the Councell, 
when any matter of lustice is to be handled (for such matters 
shall be determined by the rest of the Counsell) But yf yt be for 
any matters on land (or for any thinge w ch conc r neth trade [)], 



Laws, 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 375 

then one of the principall Marchantf shall be president (either 
Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes or Rofct Browne as they shall thinke 
fitt amongst themselues, to determyn for that purpose [)]. And 
the foresaid Counsell shall allowe of the said pson for President, 
and shall hearken to his ^positions, and take Counsell and 
resolue vppon the same, as occasion shall be offerred. And all of 
them aforenamed (exceptinge such as shalbe lefte in the Country 
as ffactors) to be in like manner of the Counsell w th yo u 
homeward^. 

17. Item the Cap tne : shall haue espetiall care that noe man 
whatsoeu r (of whatt quallity or Condicon soeu r he be) his owne 
pson beinge alsoe included herein) shall vse any priuate or 
secreete trade vpon peine of fforfecture of all thatt shall be found 
by any man soe doinge, and besides shall endure arbitrary 
ponishm*. And wee requier the principall Marchauntf to haue 
espetiall care hereof on the land, and to preuent yt soe much as 
they can or is possible. And the Cap tue : and other Marchauntf 
shall alsoe haue a vigillant eye, & good reguard on the principall 
Marchauntf, to the end the Company may be the better 
serued [Qwhoe haue beene at such excessiue chardges) and reape 
the benefitt of the trade, discou r ed by there expences. 

18 Item for better preseruacon of health, o r order is, That 
from tyme to tyme as the water Caske shall be emptied of fresh 
water, yt be forthw th againe filled w th salt water, for preuencon of 
leakeinge and mustines. 

19 Item No pson whatsoeu r w ch shall succeede by appointm* 
or otherwise, in any place of comand or office, either in o r shipp, 
or in any ffactory to be setled, shall take or be allowed the wages 
of his predecessors. But thoughe he be remoued, preferred, and 
come to any such place and office, he shall content him selfe w th 
such wages as wee haue form r lie agreed w th him for, w th out any 
further demand or incroatchm* vpon the Company for the same 
(vnlesse the Gou r no r & Comittees of the Company for the tyme 
beinge, shall be pleased to graunt the same att their retourne, or 
any other allowance of gratitude or rewarde vpon their desertes[)] . 

20 Item fforasmuch as wee are c r teinelie informed that when 
twoe of o r principall Marchantf Peter Floris, & Lucas Antheumes 
shall come into the Indies, they are lyke to be much hated by the 



376 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Dutchmen there, whoe will seeke to doe them wronge and all the 
villanie they may therefore we expreslie chardge yo u the Captaine 
(and all others that are in o r shipp & voyadge) to defend and 
preserue them from wronges, w th all the power and strength you 
may against any that shall offer to doe them wronge or iniury : 
Or shall goe aboute to hinder them in their busines, w ch might 
much endanger our voyadge. The lyke Comandem 4 wee doe 
expreslie giue vnto all others that are in any of o r shipps, & 
imployed in o r busines in any places whatsoeu r . 

21 Item Wee doe expreslie chardge yo n Capt Anthony Nippon 
not to suffer any Cabbins to be new built or altered, nor .pticons 
pulled downe in o r shipp (except for enlarginge of the hould, or 
makeinge better puision for the bringinge home of o r goodf , and 
that by the aduise of the Councell, or for the better accomoda- 
tinge of there fightes 1 if need shall be[)], or changed from the 
state they nowe are in, att the settinge out of the same, w ch in 
former voyadges haue beene done to the greate hurte of o r 
Companie, and discontent and hazard of all. 

22 Item That noe wages to noe pson whatsoeu 1 " be encreased 
or giuen contrary to whatt we haue alreadie appointed, but the 
pties to be referd to be rewarded by the Company att their 
retourne as they shall be found to haue deserued. Nor ffactors, 
mrs mates, nor other officers of espetiall place in o r shipp to be 
remoued w th out consent of such of the Councell as wee haue 
appointed to aduise w th yo u the Capt nc : vpon all occasions. And 
not to thinke vpon authoritie sett vppon yo u That the same should 
serue for any yo r rjticular respect^, knowinge that a wise man is 
best tryed when he is putt in authoritie. And that he is accompted 
of more fortitude that ou r cometh himselfe then he that p r uaileth 
against a multitude. 

23. Item Wee forbid all vnnecessarie expence of shooteinge 

1 "Fights are the wast-cloaths, which hang round about the ship, to hinder men 
" from being seen in fight ; or any place wherein men may cover themselves, & yet 
" use their arms." (Phillips's World of Words, quoted in Nares' Glossary.) 

"Being neere unto it, they spread their fights, which were of thicke mattes, and 
" began to defend themselues." (Hakluyt's account of the Dutch voyage of 1595.) 
" Clap on more sails ; pursue ; up with your fights ; 
Give fire ! She is my prize, or ocean whelm them all ! " 

Merry Wives of Windsor, Act II., Sc. 2. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



377 



of Ordinance, att drinkinge of healthes or att the Captaines or 
Cape Marchauntf goinge a shore, or such like, for that thereby 
much powder is wastfullie consumed and o r shipp and goodf putt 
in much hazard and danger : And likewise by yt way is giuen to 
the Gunners (vnder colour thereof) to embecyll the same. 

24. Item for avoiedinge confucon, in the gou r nm t of o r people, 
And for that nothinge is soe vnc r teine as the state of mans lyfe, 
Wee ordeyne that yf God shall call you Captaine Anthonie Hippon 
(duringe this voyadge) out of this world, (w ch God defend) then 
wee Comitt the same gou^m* of o r shipp and Marriners therein, 
to such as wee haue nomynated in a wryteinge subscribed by the 
Gou r no r and sealed w th the scale of the Company, putt vp into a 
Boxe N: I. sealed w th hard Waxe & deliu r ed to Cap tne : Anthony 
Hippon to be kept close, and not opened soe longe as the said 
Capt Anthonie Hippon shall hue: Butt yf it shall please God to 
take him out of this world (that shall succeede Captaine Anthony 
Hippon} Then wee ordeine thatt o r M r and Marriners in o r said 
shipp shall submit themselues to the gou^m* and Comand of 
such .pson or psons as wee haue nominated therevnto, in a 
writeinge sealed vp in a Boxe No : 2. And remaineinge in the 
Custodie of the said Capt Anthonie Hippon & those that shall 
succeede him, Prouided alwaies that noe pson whatsoeu r , w ch 
shall succeede in the foresaid place of gou^m* shall demaund be 
allowed or expect the wages of his predecessor, but shall content 
himselfe w th his first wages promysed him by the Companie, or 
referr him selfe to be considered of accordinge to his desertf att 
his retourne by the Gou r no r Deputy and Comittees of the Com- 
pany for the tyme beinge whoe haue ever respected men that 
shall deserue well of them. 

25. Item for that in many voyadges heretofore the Company 
haue beene much wronged by the takeinge in of diu r s psonns into 
thershipps [(]not interteyned by them) w ch haue beene carried into 
the East Indies, for some mens pticular gaine and proffitt to the 
greate chardge and hindraunce of the Companie Itt is therefore 
o r expresse order & direccon to yo u Captaine Anthony Hippon, 
and to all other the Marchante ffacto rs & Marriners & eu r y other 
pson or psonns, enterteyned & hired to serue in this said voyadge, 
That neither yo 11 nor any of yo u shall admitte, or suffer to passe 



378 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

or receiue into o r said shipp (in this o r nowe intended voyadge) 
any pson or psonns, of whatt degree or quallitie soeu r , other then 
such pson or psons as are interteyned and hired by the Gou r nor 
and Comittees of o r said Companie to passe therein. 

26. Item If it should happen (as God forbid) that o r shipp 
should haue wante of men or other necessary meanes (w ch such 
longe voyadges are subject vnto) then wee will that you desire to 
be releeued by any shipp yo u shall meete (w ch is appteyneinge 
vnto vs, or any other Englishe shipp, whatsoeu r ) And wee hereby 
straightlie chardge and comand all Generalls, Captaines, Masters, 
or any other Officers (in any of the shipps whatsoeu r , appteyneinge 
to the Companie of Marchauntf of London, tradeinge to the East 
Indies [)], whome yo u shall chaunce to meete in any such yo r 
distresse, That they supplie yo u , ayde and releeue yo u w th such 
men, or any other necessaries, w ch yo u shall haue neede of, & 
they may convenientlie spare yo u w th out endaungeringe them- 
selues and their shipps. And that yo u pforme the like good 
Offices to any of o r shipps, that yo 11 shall meete dureinge the said 
voyadge, whome yo u shall finde distressed. 

27 Item If yo u shall finde in yo r trauaile or can convenientlie 
come by any faire birdC or Beastf or any other thinges fitt for vs 
to present to his Ma tie : or any of the Noble Lordf, that are o r 
honorable freindf, Wee pray and requier yo u to be carefull to 
prouide, and send the same w th espetiall chardge to some carefull 
man or men that retourne to see them carefully kept, and deliu r ed 
to vs. And w th all that yf yo u shall knowe any of the Marriners or 
others to haue any such, w ch yo u cannot pcure from them for 
reason, then that yo u send vs notice thereof, to the end wee may 
take order therein accordinglie. 

28 Item And lastlie to preuent disorders and misbehauiours 
of the Marriners of this o r shipp, either in their passadge out or 
retourne whome 1 vpon o r owne Coastes, wee ordeyne that yo u 
suffer not o r foresaid shipp, either outward^ or homewardes, to 
goe into any of the portes of Faulmouth Plymouth or Darth- 
mouthe (vnlesse necessitie compell yo u therevnto[)]. 

And soe haueinge remembred what wee thinke needfull for yo r 
direccon in this voyadge, and relyinge vpon yo r dilligence and 

1 Home. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 379 

care in psueinge o r busines to o r most aduantage, Wee comitt yo u 
to the pteccon of the Almightie God, whome wee beseech to 
blesse yo r endevo", and graunte yo u a safe passadge & safe 
retourne to all o r Comfortf . 

Item Wheareas the stores appteyneinge to eu r y pticular Office 
are nowe sufficientlie furnished for this voyadge, and an Invoice 
deliu r ed vnto yo u the Cap tne : of eu r y pticular store : w ch heretofore 
in some of o r former voyadges haue (through the remisnes of o r 
Comanders[)], bene ymbecilled and appropriated to menspticular 
vses. ffor the better preuentinge therefore of the lyke incon- 
ueniences hereafter, wee ordeyne and giue yt in chardge vnto 
yo u Cap tne : Anthony Eippon, that yo u cause trewe notice to be 
taken, and a iust accompt kept of the expence of the Gunners, 
Carpenters, Boateswaines Stewardes and eu r y such store, both by 
the purser and some others that yo u shall appointe therevnto. 
That att yo r retourne wee may receiue from yo u a iust accompt 
of eu r y pticuler to be awnswered accordinge to the Invoice nowe 
deliu r ed vnto yo u , And howe the same haue beene spent and 
disposed of. 

Anthonie Hippon 

Pieter Floris 

Lucas Antheumes 

Ro'bt Browne 

Tho: Essington 



A Comission 2 graunted by vs the Gou r no r Deputy & 
Committees for the Company of Marchauntf of London 
tradeinge to the East Indies to be obserued and kept 
by Anthonie Hippon Cap tnc : and Pieter Floris, Lucas 
Antheumes and Robert Browne Marchauntf , o r principall 

1 A mistake for " sigilli." 

2 This appears to be a revised commission, substituted for the preceding docu- 
ment, and is probably the authoritative version of the Company's instructions for the 
voyage. Here again one finds cause to mourn the loss of the Court Minutes for this 
period. 





380 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

ffactors together w th Thomas Essington, Symon Euans, 
Adam Denton and George Chauncey the rest of o r ffacto" 
nowe ymployed in this o r Seauenth Voyadge. 

IMPRIMIS Whereas we the Marchauntf abouesaid 
w th O r g rea t e chardge and trouble haue p r pared a 
shipp dalled the Globe for a voyadge by Godf grace 
in her to be made to the Bay of Bcngalla & other 
places in at or aboute the East Indies and haue furnished the 
same in sufficient and plentifull manner, w th men tackle victualls 
and all other needfull prouisions fitt for such a voyadge, And 
haueinge beene pswaded by the good reporte of diuers, and alsoe 
of an espetiall trust and Confidence wee haue of the integritie, 
wisdome and resolucons of o r loueinge freindf Anthonie Hippon, 
Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes and Robert Browne doe appointe and 
authorize the said Anthony Nippon, to be o r cheef Capt and 
Maister duringe the said voyadge and ordeine him to haue the 
full gou'nm* over the shipp and Marriners, And Peter Floris, 
Lucas Antheumes and Robert Browne to be o r principall Marchauntf 
and ffactors. And haue appointed Tho : Essington, Symon Euans, 
Adam Denton, George Chauncey o 1 ' ffactors to be assistaunt to them, 
Ouer all w ch said Marchaunt^ and ffactors the Captaine shall haue 
noe Comand nor authoritie, neither by water nor land in any 
matters conc r ninge trade. 

2 Item Thatt all money and Marchandize w ch shall be 
shippt here, by the Gou r nor and Comp : shall be kept by the 
Captaine he geiueinge a receipt for the same, w ch foresaid receipt 
shall be kept by Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes and Robert Browne 
thereby to demand the said money and goodf when they shall 
come to those places where they shall vse the same, and then the 
same shall be delhTed by the Capt vnto them from tyme to tyme 
duringe the said voyadge. 

3 Item To the end that Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes and 
Robert Browne may the better pforme their busines in their trade 
(the w ch wee doe referr vnto their discrecons [)] Wee doe there- 
fore expreslie chardge yo u Thomas Essington, Symon Euans, 
Adam Denton, and George Chauncey to be readie att all tymes to 
goe either by water or land wheresoeu r o r said principall Mar- 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 381 

chauntf shall direct yo u and requier the same for the Companies 
occasions. 

4 Item We will that the Captaine shall cause the boatf or 
Sciffes to be alwaies in a readines, to be ymployed to all such 
places as o r principall Marchauntf shall appointe them, and not 
to dispose of them any otherwise soe longe as they shall haue 
occasion to vse them. 

5 Item such Marchandize wares and money as the Captaine 
shall deliu r vnto the handf of the principall Marchauntf, he shall 
take a receipt from them there, And such wares and Mar- 
chandize as shall be brought into the shipp by the foresaid 
principall Marchaunte Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes & Robert 
Browne or such as shall succeede in their places beinge Marked 
w th the Companies m r ke, they shall take a receipt of the Capt ne : 
for the same, and this shall be done soe often as any goodf shall 
be dischardged forth of the shipp or laden into the shipp. And 
the Captaine to be carefull that the goodf be well p r serued and 
kept drie, To w ch end he shall haue a spetiall care, to looke 
often tymes vnto the overlopps thatt yt be well kept. 

6. Item The principall Marchauntf shall neither doe nor pre- 
tend to begynne to doe any thinge (w ch is w th out the Compasse of 
their tradeinge) w th out the Counsell of the Captaine and other 
ffactors, whether ytt be in setling any ffactorie, or any contract or 
agreem* to be made w th any kinge or Potentate in the Indies, 
neither shall the Captaine haue any authoritie on the land, to 
haue any thinge to doe w th the trade of Marchandize. But 
therein whollie wee doe authorize and putt in trust o r principall 
Marchaunte Peter ffloris, Lucas Antheumes and Robert Browne to 
be cheefe Comanders on the Land to the end they may pforme 
their busines accordinge to their owne invention. And Thomas 
Essington, Symon Evans, Adam Denton, & George Chauncey 
shall be w th them to assiste them both in keepinge bookes of 
accomptf , as alsoe the Cashe. Butt not meete to disburse any 
money (eyther in the chardges or otherwyse) w th out the know- 
ledge and expresse Comandement of the principall Marchauntf . 

7 Item Itt is expreslie ordered, that by agenerall Consent 
of you the Captaine MarchauntC ffactors & Marriners some good 
order be by yo u taken, and sett downe in writeing, soe soone as 



382 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

yo u come to Sea, conc r ninge the disposeinge of dead mens goodf 
in the voyadge, either by Comittinge the same by Inuentorie to 
the pticular keepinge of some men in the shipps & this vpon Con- 
uenient consideracons for keepinge the same, or by sale of soe 
much thereof att the mayne maste, as may not exceede a third 
parte of the buyers wages, for either buyinge or borrowinge to 
preuent such preiudice to o r Company as wee haue felt, by 
Marriners buyinge soe much as their whole wages came vnto 
whereby they haue not onlie forsaken o r shipps before their 
dischardge butt alsoe depriued vs of meanes to redresse such 
wronges as they haue many wayes done vs in the voyadge. 
Alsoe that there be noe Dealinge by exchaunge betvveene ptie and 
ptie neither money for money, comoditie for money, or comoditie 
for comoditie outward^ nor homewardes, for such exchaunge giues 
way for them to take and purloine of o r goodf. ffor preuencon 
whereof wee order that neither the Purser, nor any other doe 
register, witnes, or take knowledge of any such contract by 
Exchaunge. And noe man to be admitted meanes to bringe 
goodf abourd vpon paine of forfecture to the Company of that 
w ch shall be soe brought in, And yf any ffactor shall happen to 
die, his bookes accomptf and other thinges are to be ordered by 
the Captaine, and safelie reserued and brought home for England 
(an Inuentorie first taken thereof and registred in the pursers 
booke, to bee witnessed by twoe or three others of the Com- 
panie[)]. And that eu r y Marriner or other in the shipp, doe sett 
their hand or marke to the said orders mentioned in this 7 th 
article. 

8 Item If the principall Marchauntf shall haue occasion 
to vse 5 or 6 Marriners or more to helpe to watch & keepe the 
good on land in their howses, then yo 11 Captaine Anthonie Hippon 
shall vpon there demand lett them haue soe many as they shall 
need and those to be of the best and trustiest men alsoe. 

9 Item To the end that the Company may be the better in 
all thingf iustlie dealt w th all, and the true and vpright carriadge 
of the busines may be made manifest and appeare plainlie The 
foresaid principall Marchauntf Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes and 
Rofet Browne shall keepe a iust and true accompt of all that 
shall be done by way of Marchandizinge And shall doe nothinge 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 383 

att any tyme w th out haueinge the English bookep 1 or the Cashere 
by them, And shall informe instruct and showe, them all such 
knowledge, misterie, or arte appteineinge to their tradeinge as 
shall be in their power to pforme, And the said pties shall all of 
them eu r y eight dayes (or soe often as possiblie they may) 
compare the bookes and the Cashe together, to the end that 
yf any error should be comitted by the one or thother the same 
might be amended, and the bookes kept in good ballance : Soe 
that by Iffe or death of any of them the state of the bookes might 
be found pfect. 

10. Item to the end the voyadge be not hindred through 
want of victualls wee doe ordeine and requier that the Captaine 
shall not alter the dailie allowance of victualls, w th out first 
haueinge taken Counsell & consent of o r principall Marchaunt 
whoe shall keepe Counter bookes of all the victualls that are 
spent, and that shall remaine in Esse the better to make their 
reck[on]inge for their pceedinge in the voyadge. And when yo u 
shall come vnto the Land then shall the victualls be lockt vp in the 
shipp and the principall Marchauntf shall prouide fresh victualls 
from the land the better to lengthen out their store soe much the 
longer. But yf they cannot prouide any, then yo u may vse the 
shipps victualls as tyme and occasion shall inforce you. 

ii Item forasmuch as we are pswaded of the discretion 
circumspection and good vnderstandinge of o r principall Mar- 
chauntf Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes, and Rofct Browne wee 
doe ordeyne that their opinions & direccons in the busines of 
trade in Marchandizeinge, be followed w th out any controlm*, As 
likewise wee will and requier yo u Captaine Anthony Hippon that 
yo u be alwaies readie to saile to all such landes and portes as the 
foresaid Peter Floris and Lucas Antheumes shall direct yo u to saile 
vnto and there to remayne vntill the said principall Marchauntf 
Peter Floris and Lucas Antheumes and Rofet Browne shall haue 
finished there busines, And then from thence to saile to such 
other places as the said Peter Floris and Lucas Antheumes shall 
requier yo u And this shall be soe often by yo u pformed as they 
shall desire (for therein consisteth the welfare of the whole 
voyadge [)]. And noe man shall counsaile or resolue to retourne 

1 Book-keeper. 



384 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

homewardes vntill such tyme as o r said principall m r chauntf shall 
haue fullie finisht there intended trade vpon forfecture of all their 
wages, and seveare ponishment for the same. 

12 Item The ires from his Ma tie : w ch wee haue procured 
vnto the Kinges Brinces and Potentates of the Indies, 1 and haue 
made in the names of o r principall Marchauntes Peter Floris, 
Lucas Antheumes and Robert Browne together w th Thomas Essington 
Symon Euans, & Adam Denton o r factors and deliu r ed vnto o r said 
principall Marchauntes shall be presented by them, in the 
presence of the rest of o r ffactors, [(]or soe many of o r Englishe 
Marchantf as shall be therevnto appointed) in the name of the 
kinges Ma tie : of England, and for the honor of the English 
Nation, by them to procure such freedome both of Customes 
and all other thinges as they shall finde to be profitable for the 
Companie, and that the Companie may thereby be trewlie 
informed of whatsoeu r shall be done therein. 

13 Item To the end all difficult matters may the better be 
passed over by good endeuors wee doe appointe a Counsell of 
eight psonns whereof Capteine Anthonie Hippon to be president 
(in matters of the shipp or for iustice [)], and Peter Floris Lucas 
Antheumes and Rofot Browne w th Thomas Essington Symon Euans 
and Adam Denton and George Chauncey being in all eight psonns, 
whereof one of them to recorde whatt matters shall passe, shall 
be a sufficient Counsell to determyn all Cryminall and Cyuell 
matters that shall come before them yett forasmuch as Peter 
Floris and Lucas Antheumes haue excused them selues that they 
are not acquainted w th the lawes and iustice of o r land therefore 
they shall be exempted and not required to come to the Counsell 
when any matter of Iustice is to be handled (for such matters 
shall be determyned by the rest of the Counsell) But yf yt 
be for any matters on land (or for any thinge w ch conserneth 
trade) then one of the principall Marchauntf shall be President 
either Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes or Robt Browne as they 
shall thinke fitt amongst themselues to determyne for that 
purpose, And the foresaid Counsell shall allowe of the said 
pson for president and shall hearken to his propoticons, and take 
Counsaile, and resolue vpon the same as occasion shall be offerred. 

1 See page 421. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 385 

14 Item yf yt should happen that o v principall Marchauntf 
Peter Floris, Lucas Antheumes and Rofet Browne, should not 
carrie them selues well in this voyadge, there faultes and 
misdoeinges shall be written vpp & dehVed over vnto the 
Company in England for to be censured by them, butt they shall 
not be displaced duringe the voyadge. 

15. Item the Captaine shall haue aspetiall care that noe man 
whatsoeu r , of whatt quallitie or Condicon soeuer he bee (his owne 
pson beinge alsoe included herein) shall vse any priuate or 
secreete trade, vpon peine and 1 forfecture of all that shall be found 
by any man soe doinge, and besidf shall endure arbitrary 
ponishment, And wee requier the principall Marchauntf to haue 
a spetiall care hereof on the land, and to preuent yt soe much as 
is possible, And the Captaine and other Marchauntf shall alsoe 
haue a vigelent Eye & good reguard on the principall Marchauntf 
to the end the Companie may be the better serued (whoe haue 
beene att such excessiue chardge) & reape the benefitt of the 
trade discou r ed by their expences. 

16 Item fforasmuch as wee are c r teinelie enformed, that 
when twoe of o r principall Marchauntf Peter Floris & Lucas 
Antheumes shall come into the Indies they are like to be much 
hated by the Dutchmen there whoe will seeke to doe them wronge 
and all the villanie they may, therefore wee expreslie chardge 
yo u the Captaine (and all others that are in o r shipp and 
voyadge [)] to defend and preserue them from wronges w th all the 
power and strength yo u may against any that shall offer to doe 
them wronge or iniurie : Or shall goe aboute to hinder them in 
their busines, w ch might much indanger o r voyadge, The like 
Comandem* wee doe expreslie giue vnto all others that are in any 
of o r shipps & imployed in o r busines in any places whatsoeuer. 

17. Item for avoiedinge Confusion in the gou'nm* of o r 
people, and for that nothinge is soe vncerteine as the state of 
mans life: Wee ordeine that }f God shall call yo 11 Captaine 
Anthonie Hippon duringe this voyadge, out of the world, (w ch God 
defend) then wee Comitt the gou r nment of o r shipp & Marriners 
therin to such as wee haue nominated in a writtinge subscribed 
by the Gou r no r & sealed w th the seale of the Company putt vp 

1 A mistake for " of." 

I 1) 



386 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

into a Boxe N : i sealed w th hard waxe & deliu r ed to Captaine 
Anthonie Hippon to be kept close and not opened, soe longe as 
the said Captaine Anthony Hippon shall lyue Butt yf yt shall 
please god to take him out of this world that shall succeede 
Captaine Anthonie Hippon then wee ordeyne that o r Master and 
Marriners in o r said shipp shall submitt them selues to the 
gou^m* and Comand of such pson or psons as wee haue 
nomyriated therevnto in a writeinge sealed vp in a Boxe N : 2 & 
remayneinge in the Custodie of the said Captaine Anthonie 
Hippon & those that shall succeede him. Prouided alwayes that 
noe pson whatsoeu r w ch shall succeede in the aforesaid place of 
gou'iim 1 , shall demand, be allowed, or expect the wages of his 
predecessor, butt shall content himselfe w th his first wages 
promised him by the Companie. Or referr himselfe to be Con- 
sidered of accordinge to his deserte (att his retourne) by the 
Gou r no r and Comittees of the Companie for the tyme beinge. 

18 Item If yt should happen (as God forbid) that o r shipp 
should haue waunte of men or other necessarie meanes (w dl such 
longe voyadges are subiect vnto) Then we will that yo u desire 
to be releeued by any shipp yo u shall meete w ch is appteineinge 
vnto vs, [(]or any other Englishe shipp whatsoeu 1 ") And wee doe 
hereby straightlie chardge all Generalls Captaines Masters or 
any other Officers (in any of the shippes whatsoeu r appteineinge 
to the Company of Marchauntf of London tradeinge to the East 
Indies [)] whome yo u shall chaunce to meete in any such yo r 
distresse thatt they supplie ayde and releyue yo 11 w th such men or 
any other necessaries w ch yo u shall haue neede of, and they may 
conuenientlie spare yo u w th out endaungeringe them selues and 
their shipps. And that yo u pforme like good office to any of our 
shipps that yo u shall meete duringe the said voyadge whome yo u 
shall finde distressed. 

19 Item Whereas we haue sent alonge w th yo u one chest of 
money conteyneinge fower thowsand Ryalls of 8. w ch wee intend 
for a stocke to be lefte at Bantam against the tyme that yt shall 
please God to send o r shippinge thether Wee doe therefore 
ordeine that o r principall Marchauntf Peter Floris Lucas 
Antheumes and Robt Browne shall leaue one or twoe of o r ffactors 
att Bantam [(] whome they by their experience shall finde most 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 387 

fitt to vndertake the same seruice) together w th the said Cheste of 
money intended for the foresaid stocke (or the valewe thereof) as 
alsoe halfe of the proceede w ch shall be raysed by the ymploym* 
thereof in their said voyadge thither, where o r said ffactors shall 
remaine, and make ymploym* of the said stocke and proceede 
thereof in such Comodities as by your discretion shall be thought 
most necessarie to be transported w th our shipping for o r best 
aduantage to such places as shall be found conuenient, And the 
other halfe of the gaine to be for the accompt of the Globe. 

20. Item yf yo u shall finde in yo r trauaile, or can conue- 
nientlie come by any faire birdes or beastes, or any other thinge 
fitt for vs to present to his Ma tie , or any of the noble Lordf 
that are o r hono ble freindf , Wee pray and requier yo u to be 
carefull to prouide, & send the same w th espetiall chardge to some 
carefull man or men that retourne, to see them carefullie kept 
and deliu r ed to vs. And w th all yf you shall knowe any of the 
Marriners or others to haue any such w ch yo u cannot pcure from 
them for reason then that yo u send vs notice thereof, to the end 
we may take order theirein accordinglie. 

And soe haueing remembred what wee thinke needfull for yo r 
direccon in this voyadge, and relyinge vpon yo r dilligence and care 
in pursuing o r busines to o r most aduantage Wee comitt yo u to the 
pteccon of the Almightie God, whome wee beseech to blesse yo r 
endevo rs and graunte yo u a safe passadge and safe retourne to all 
o r comfortes. 

Item Whereas wee haue giuen direccons that one or twoe of o r 
ffactors should be lefte at Bantam, whome o r principall Mar- 
chauntf Peter Floris Lucas Antheumes and Rofet Browne by their 
experience shall finde most fitt for o r seruice there, vpon further 
aduise and Consideracon Wee doe now ordeyne that Thomas 
Essington shall passe from porte to porte w th yo u dureing the said 
voyadge, and retourne backe againe w th yo u in the same shipp 
into England : And that yo u take the oportunitie (from the most 
conuenient place yo u shall arriue att) to send one or twoe of o r 
ffactors in such conuenient shippinge as [yo u ] may procure) to 
carrie his Ma'? ires vnto the kinge of lapan, together w th such 
stocke of Marchandize & Comodities as wee haue appointed o r 
said principall Marchauntf to prouide for that purpose And yf 

I D I 



3 88 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

you should be driue to any want of ffactors during this o r said 
voyadge then yo u may ymploye the purser or his mate, or both 
yf occasion require, soe that yo u be espetiallie carefull to supply 
the place of the purser w th some sufficient pson to vndertake that 
voyadge. 

Memoranda It is ordeyned by vs that yf God should take out 
of this world o r loueinge freind Rofat Browne, Then wee doe 
referr y u vnto a Boxe N. 3. to vnderstand o r will and pleasure, 
Whome wee haue appointed to succeede him in place, of o r prin- 
cipall ffactor, to be ioyned w th Peter ffloris and Lucas Antheumes, 
o r other principall ffactors. 

Anthonie Hippon 
Peter ffloris. 
Lucas Antheumes 
Robt Browne 
Thomas Essington 




Most highe and mightie kinge: 1 

JS there is nothinge w ch increaseth more the glory & 
dignitie of Sou r eigne Princes vpon earth then to 
extend their renowne vnto farr discident Nations, 
Soe haueing vnderstoode of late yeares from some of 
o r loueinge Subiectf, that haue traded into diu r s Countries 
neere adioyneinge vnto yo", of the reputation 
and greatnes of yo r power and dominion. Wee 
and in " haue incourradged o r said Subiectf to vndertake a 
voyadge into yo r Country, aswell to sollicitt yo r 
freindshipp and Amity w th vs, as to enteyne 2 such Comodities of 
each others Countries as may be most of vse the one to the other, 
being nothinge doubtfull but such will be yo r princelie magna- 
nimity and disposicon to imbrace this o r desire, and not onlie to 
receiue o r people w th yo r accustomed benignitie and favo r , but 

1 These appear to be copies of Royal letters carried out in the Eighth Voyage 
(see page 396, note). 

3 " Enterteyne" seems to be meant. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 389 

for their better incourradgm* to afford yo r Ryall proteccon for the 
setlinge of a ffactorie there, w th such securitie and libtie of 
Comerce, as shall be most conuenient for the aduancem* of the 
mutuall proffitt and Comoditie of each others subiectf ; Wherein 
for o r parte wee doe willinglie offer o r selues & the lifotie of o r 
kingdomes and Countries when soeuer any of yo r subiectf 3 shall 
vndertake to haue any communicacon w th vs. And in the meane 
tyme, as a pledge of o r Royall inclinacon and desier towardf yo u , 
wee haue sent yo u a small present by our seruant &. $3. w ch we 
pray yo u to accept, as an introduccon to that freindshipp w ch we 
hope will fructifie and encrease to each others Contentm*. 
Giuen att o r Pallace of Westm the &c. 



To the kinge of Cambaia 

lames by the grace of Almightie God kinge of 
greate Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland, defendo r of the 
Christian faith &c : To the highe and mightie Prince 
the greate kinge of Cambaia, Emperour of Mogores &c 
greetinge 

Most highe & mightie Emperour. 

can not but expresse vnto yo u the highe Contentm* 
wee haue receiued att the-kinde reception and inter- 
teynem* of o r seruant Captaine William Hawkins, and 
his Company att yo r porte of Suratt, where they haue 
receiued soe many demonstracons by yo r principall Officers and 
Comanders there, of yo r desire to imbrace o r loue and freindshipp, 
and to interteyne a Correspondencie of peaceable trade and 
Comerce w th o r subiectf, as wee can not but thankfullie 
acknowledge the same, and reciprocallie offer the lyke effect^ 
toward^ yo u and yo r people, whensoeu r they shall vndertake to 
haue any Comunicacon of trade w th in o r kingdomes and domi- 
nions : Butt wee were sorrie to vnderstand of that vnhappy 




39 o FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

accident, 1 w ch befell o r Subiectf, in their retourne from yo r Coastes 
toward^ their Shipps, by being vnworthilie surprized w th in yo r 
streames by diu r s ffriggettf? of the Portingalls of Goa, Whoe 
vniustlie haue taken from them Nyneteene of o r Subiectf besides 
agreat quantitie of their Marchandize, and detainethem prisonners 
att Goa, vnder this sole pretext, as yf both yo r selfe, and yo r 
Countries were assubiected to the Crowne of Spaine, and 
therefore not lawfull for any other Christian people to trade w th 
yo u , w ch indignitie, thoughe Almightie God hath geuen vs power 
enoughe to reuenge against them, yett because ytt hath relacon to 
yo r greate estate, as beinge done w th in the Compasse of yo r power 
and authoritie, wee haue thought good first to represent yt 
vnto yo u , and to seeke redresse of ytt by yo r meanes, then enter 
into any course of hostilitie in those partes contrary to the 
peaceable inclination of trade w ch o r Subiectf are willinge to 
interteyne w th all other nations. Notw th stand[ing] such hard suc- 
cesse o r subiectC are noe whitt discourradged from vndertakeinge 
(as nowe they doe) an other voyadge into yo r Countreys, w th three 
good shipps laden w th such Commodities of o r kingdomes as may 
be most of vse to yo r people, beinge Confident of yo r further favo r 
and pteccon, w th such ymunities and priuiledges for their trade and 
Comerce w th yo r people, as may encourradge them more and 
more to fixe and contynue a firme Correspondencie there, to the 
encrease of proffitt of each others Subiectf . And for a pledge of 
o r Royall inclinacon toward f yo u , wee haue sent yo u a small 
present by o r seruant 31 1$. Generall of this o r voyadge w ch I 
pray yo u to accept in good parte, and to vse him w th all courtesie 
and respect, as is befittinge the quallitie of his place Giuen att 
o r Pallace of Westminster the &c. 



See page 219, note. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 391 

Comander of Cambaia 

lames by the grace of Almighty God kinge of greate 
Brittane ffraunce and Ireland defender of the Christian 
faith &c : To the right hono ble : the Cheefe Comander of 
the greatt Cittie of Cambaia greetinge. 

|HERE[AS] wee haue vnderstoode from some of o r 
Subiectf whatt greate Courteseys they haue receiued, 
and daily doe receaue att yo r handf , in their arriuall 
and settlement of their trade in the greate Cittie of 
Cambaia wee could not omitt att this second voyadge thither, 
butt to expresse vnto yo u o r thankfull acknowledgm* for the same 
w th o r constant hope of yo r further endevors towardf them, aswell 
for their future safeguard and proteccon in those places, against 
the violence and malice of any that should attempt to wronge 
them, as for their better incourradgm* to establishe and increase 
(as nowe they haue begun alreadie) a firme Correspondence of 
trade in those partes ; wherein for o r parte, wee will nott omitt 
any thinge that may tend to the furtheringe of soe greate a good 
for the aduancm* of o r Subiectf . And as for the iniurie and 
losse w ch o r Subiectf latelie receiued by the Portingalls of Goa (as 
is well knowne vnto yo u ) thoughe wee want noe meanes to 
reuenge our selues against them, yett because wee would be loth 
to interrupt the peaceable course of trade in those partes, and for 
thatt the Iniurie doth alsoe redowne to yo u , as beinge done w th in 
the limittf of yo r Comand : Wee haue thought good first to 
requier yo r peacable intercession for the redresse thereof, before 
o r Subiectf should attempt any thinge hostilly against them, 
wherein yo u shall doe a worke worthy of yo r selfe, and by w ch yo u 
shall oblige o r people more and more vnto yo u . And for o r good 
inclinacon toward^ yo u : wee haue sent yo u a token of o r loue 
and freindshipp by o r seruaunt & iS Generall of this our voyadge. 
Giuen att o r Pallace of Westminst r the &c : . 




3Q2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

To the K : of Succatora. 

lames by the grace of Almightie God kinge of 
greate Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland Defender of the 
Christian faith &c : To the highe and Mightie Prince 
the kinge of Succatora. 

Most mightie Kinge 

[AUEINGE vnderstoode from some of o r loueinge 
Subiectf that in their course of Nauigacon, and 
traffique into diu r s partes of the East Indies they haue 
alsoe visitted yo v Coastes and Territories where they 
haue not onelie refreshed them selues of such necessaries as are 
belongeinge to soe greate a Nauigation, butt haue alsoe receiued 
the best interteynem* thatt could be expected : Wee hould ytt o r 
parte to acknowledge the same w th thankes, and to ymbrace yo 1 ' 
Amity and freindshipp w tb all the respect? of hono r thatt may tend 
to the establishinge and encreaseinge of the same to o r mutuall 
contentation and aduancm* of proffitt of each others subiectes : 
Wherein for o r parte, as wee doe readilie offer o r selues, and any 
thinge thatt shall be in o r power, soe wee doe expect the lyke 
effect? from yo u to redound vpon o r Subiect?, in yo r good vsage of 
them, and affourdinge them yo r Princelie flavors and pteccon 
against such as should goe aboute to harme them. And for a 
pledge of this o r good inclination toward? yo u , wee haue sent yo u 
this small Present by o r seruaunt H $3. w ch wee pray yo u to 
accept in good parte. Gyuen att our Pallace of Westminster 
the &c : 



To the k : of Bantam. 

lames by the grace of God kinge of greate Brittaine 
ffraunce and Ireland Defender of the Christian faith &c : 
To the most Highe and mightie Prince the Kinge of 
Bantam Greeteinge. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 393 

Right highe and mightie Prince. 

|TT hath beene noe small contentm* vnto vs, to vnder- 
stand from o r Subiectf retourned from their last 
voyadge into yo r Countreys, both howe favorablie they 
haue beene vsed by yo u , and yo r people, and howe 
willinge yo 11 haue beene to interteyne o v loue and freindshipp, both 
w ch , yo u haue beene Contented to confirme vnto vs, by a Present 
of fower balls 1 of silke, w ch yo u haue sent vnto vs, ffor w ch wee 
cannott but retourne vnto yo 11 , o r harty thankes w th all the kinde 
demonstracons of o r reciprocall desier to encrease o r Amytie and 
Correspondency w th yo u , as farr as the same may be honorable 
vnto vs, and pmtable to each others Subiectf ; In Confidence 
whereof, o r Subiectf haueinge vndertaken a newe voyadge into yo r 
Countrie for the reestablishinge of their trade and traffique w th 
yo r Subiectf, wee hope yo u will Contynue vnto them yo r 
accustomed favour, and afford them such liberties and immunities 
there, as they may be thereby both incourradged in their greate 
adventures, and secured from oppression or wronge of any that 
would goe aboute to harme them, And in thankfullnes of theis 
yo r kindnesses to our people, wee haue sent yo u a token by this 
bearer o r seruant H 33 Generall of o r present voyadge. Gyven att 
o r Pallace of Westminster, the 



K. of Tedore. 

lames by the grace of Almightie God kinge of great 
Brittane, ffraunce and Ireland Defendor of the Christian 
faith &c : To the most highe and mighty Prince, the 
kinge of Tedore Greetinge 

Most highe and mightie kinge 

|S wee haue taken greate contentm* to vnderstand from 
o r Marchauntf att their retourne from their last 
voyadge out of yo 1 ' Country, howe kindlie and 
favorablie they haue beene interteyned by yo u , and yo r 
people in their peacable trade, Soe wee cannot but reiteratiuely 

1 Bales? 




394 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

expresse o r thankes for the same, w th all the respectf of honor, 
that can be expected from vs, being ready both to ymbrace your 
freindshipp and Amity, and to establish a constaunt entercourse 
of trade and traffique betwixt each others Subiectf, ffor w ch 
purpose our Subiectf haueinge vndertaken a new voyadge into yo r 
Countrey, wee could not butt take occasion to salute yo u & to 
pray yo u to contynue yo r favor towardf them, w th such Condicons 
of safetie and Imunitie to their psonns, shipps, and goodf , as they 
may be both encouraged in their iust and honest course, and 
protected against any wronge and vyolence of any thatt would 
goe aboute to harme them. And for a pledge of o r princelie 
disposition toward? yo u Wee haue sent yo u a token by our 
servaunt 31 13 Generall of o r Marchauntf present voyadge Gyven 
att o r Pallace of Westm the 



Gouernor of Aden. 

lames by the grace of Almightie God kinge of great 
Brittane ffraunce and Ireland defender of the Christian 
ffaith &c : To the right honorable Lord the Gou r no r 
of the Cittie of Aden Greetinge 

Right honorable Lord. 

i 

JHE entercourse of Amity and freindshipp, w dl hath 

beene theis ma[n]y yeares betweene vs and o r Pre- 
decessors, and the mightie howse of Ottoman, confirmed 
by soe many demonstracons of free comerce and 
liberty of trade through each others kingdomes and domynions, 
hath incourradged o r Marchauntf to frequent alsoe those partes, 
where yo u haue chardge, and the rather because they haue latelie 
vnderstoode thatt twoe of their shipps in their course of Nauigacon 
into diu r s partes of the East Indies, haue alsoe beene in the 
mouth of the red Sea, and founde oportunitie of traffique by 
enterteyneinge each others Comodities, w ch hath enduced them 
nowe to vndertake this voyadge, and prayed our intercession vnto 
yo u for them, that they might be favorablic receiued, and enioye 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 395 

in those partes alsoe such libtie of trade w th safety and good 
vsage for their psonns shipps and goodf as they nowe haue and 
inioye in the hither partf of the Grand Signio dominions, w ch 
wee doe not doubt but yo u will be willinge to afford vnto them, 
and the rather, because they bringe w th them a safe Conduct 1 
from the Grand Signior in that behalfe. And of o r good will and 
inclinacon towardes yo u , wee haue sent yo u a small token by 
o r Servaunt & $3 w ch wee pray yo u to accept in good parte. And 
soe wee Comitt yo u to the proteccon of the most highe and 
mightie God, the Creator and preseruer of all thinges. ffrom 
o r Pallace att Westminster the 



Sabander of Nero. 

lames by the grace of Almightie God kinge of greate 
Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland defender of the Christian 
faith &c : To the right ho ble : the Sabander of Nero 
Greeteinge 

Right hono ble Lord. 

THOUGHE wee haue heretofore by o r letters vnto yo u 
expressed our acknowledgm* for the favorable vsadge 
and interteynem* yo u haue giuen to o r Subiectf in 
their trade and traffique w th in yo r Countreys, yett they 
haueinge nowe vndertaken alyke voyadge thither againe Wee can 
not but reiterate o r former acknowledgm* as a matter honorable 
vnto you, and acceptable to vs : And the rather because wee doe 
not doubt, but thereby yo u will be more and more induced to 
afford vnto o r Subiectf such further favour and proteccon w th all 
Condicons of honor and safetie to their psons, Shipps and goodf , 
as may incourradge them to contynue their trade and Comerce 
w th yo r people, wherein yo u shall doe a worke worthy of yo r selfe, 
and much aduantagious to the proffitt of each others Subiectf . 
And for a demonstracon of o r fauorable inclynation toward^ you, 
and embraceinge of yo r loue and freindshipp wee haue sent yo u 
a token by o r servaunt 31 $3 Generall of this o r voyadge : w ch wee 

1 See page 434. 




396 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

pray yo 11 to accept in good pte, and to honor and respect him 
accordinge to the quallitie of his place Giuen att o r Pallace 
of Westminst r this &c : 



A Comission 1 sett downe by vs the Gou r no r Deputy 
and Comittees for the Marchauntf of London 

April 40; 1611. -ri Tt-ri ,. ~ 

tradeinge to the Last Indies tor better direccon 
of o r loueinge freindf lohn Sairis 2 Captaine and cheefe 
Comander and Gabriell Towerson 3 Captaine of the 
Hector o r principall and cheefe Marchauntf & others 
the Marchauntf M rs : & Marriners in this o r intended eight 
Voyadge to the East Indies w ch wee humblie beseech 
Almightie God to prosp w th a happie Conclusion. 

IN PRIM IS Wheares wee the Marchauntf abouesaid 
w th Q r g re ate chardge and trouble haue p r pared three 
shipps (to saye) 

The Clone lames ff osier : M r : 
The Hector Thorn : fuller M r : 
The Thomas Rich : Dawes M r : 

for avoyadge by godf grace in them to be made to the East 
Indies, haue furnished the same sufficientlie and in plentifull 
manner w th men tackle and all other needfull puisions for such 
a voyadge. Of an espetiall trust & Confidence wee haue of the 
integritie, wisdome, and resolucon of o r loueinge freind lohn 
Sairis gen doe appointe and authorize him cheefe Capt & 
Comander to goe in the Cloue, & to Comand all o r said shipps & 
in the men in them, haueinge pcured him sufficient authoritie 
from o r sou r eigne Lord the kinges Ma tie : for that purpose 4 : Not 

1 For the Eighth Voyage under Saris, especially memorable for the opening up of 
trade with Japan, and the establishment of a factory in that country. 

3 See page 92, note. 3 See page 33, note. 

4 There is a minute of this royal commission in the Public Record Office, under 
date 3oth March, 1611 (see Cal. of State Papers, E. Indies, 1513-1616, p. 215). No copy 
of it is known ; but it doubtless followed on the lines of previous commissions, of 
which there are several examples in the present volume. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 397 

doublings butt thatt he will soe behaue himselfe in his chardge as 
he may be both feared and loued : And that he will w th all his 
dilligence and endevors prosecute our designes & labour to bringe 
this costlie voyadge to a happie end. 

2 Item wee doe appointe and ordeyne o r loueinge freind 
Gabriell Towerson gen to be Captaine of the Hector and men, 
& to take his passadge in the said shipp And Tempest Peacocke 
to be cheefe Marchaunte in the Thomas : All w ch Comanders 
Marchauntf ffactors Masters & Marriners we trust will soe carrie 
them selues w th due respect one to an other, & obedience to eu r y 
one of their Superio rs as loue and kindnes may be continued on 
all sides, and all whollie applie their wittf and endeuo rs for the 
due pformance of this voyadge in the best manner they may for 
the good of the Companie 

3 Item and for that religeous gou^m* doth best binde men 
to pforme their duties it is principally to be cared for : That 
prayers be said eu r y morninge and eueninge in eu r y shipp & the 
whole company called therevnto w th dilligent Eyes that none be 
wantinge soe as all may ioyntlie w th reuerence and humilitie pray 
vnto Almightie God to blesse and preserue them from all dangers 
in this longe and tedious voyadge : ffor the better pformance 
whereof wee haue deliu r ed to each of the pursers a Bible wherein 
is conteyned the booke of comon prayer. 

4 Item That noe blasphemeinge of God, swereinge, thefte, 
drunkennes, or otherlike disorders be vsed but that the same be 
seu r lie ponished And thatt noe diceinge or other vnlawfull games 
be admitted for that most comonly the same is the beginninge 
of quarrellinge, and many tymes occasion of murther, a iust 
puocation of Godf wrath & vengeaunce, from w ch the Lord deliu 1 ' 
vs all. Therefore ytt shall be needfull that such orders be sett vpp 
& published in eu r y shipp, and such ponishm* appointed for such 
offences as may giue notice to eu r y man whatt he ought to 
avoied. 

5 Item that spetiall order be giuen that noe liquor be spilt 
in the ballast of the shipps, or filthines be left w th in bourde w ch 
in heate breedeth noysome smells & infeccon, but thereby a 
dilligent care be had to keepe the ou r lopps & other places of the 
shipps cleane and sweete w dl is a notable preseruation of health : 
Wherein the Officers of o r shipps in former voyadges haue beene 



398 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

much to be blamed, to the greate spoile of o r shipps & breedinge 
of sicknes, w ch wee trust in this will be carefullie reguarded. 

6 Item Thatt the cheefe Captaine & Comander & Capt 
of the Hector, and Cape Marchaunt of the Thomas & M re of the 
shipps doe take due notice by Inventorie from eu r y Officer of the 
shipps before they depte out of the riuer of Theames of the seu r all 
puisions deliu r ed into each shipp. And soe soone as they shall 
come to Sea & not before to settle the same in the chardge of the 
Officers appointed for thatt purpose in each shipp, vntill w ch tyme 
all stores are to remaine vnder locke & key, & that the same 
be entred in the pursers bookes, vnderwritten by the said Officers, 
to thend that such thinges as are puided for their needfull supplies 
may not be ymbecilled & that nothinge thereof of any valewe 
be ymployed for any vse whatsoeu r w th out a warrant vnder the 
hand of the cheefe Captaine and Comander Captaine of the 
Hector, Cape Marchaunt of the Thomas or cheefe Marchaunt 
of each shipp respectiuelie directed to the Officer that hath such 
chardge, w ch warrant shall serue for their dischardge in their 
accomptes, ells otherwise to be awnsweared for the same w th 
their wages. And eu r y, such warrant to be registred in the 
pursers booke, the day of the mormeth and the occasion And 
this vpon forfecture of soe much out of the pursers wages 
yf it be throughe his neglecte, this order to be obserued in each 
shipp as aforesaid, that att the retourne of the said shipps a true 
accompt may be yealded, howe and what manner the same may 
be vsed and ymployed. 

7 Item to thend that all difficult matters may be the better 
passed over w th good aduise and discrecon : wee doe appointe a 
Counsell to be called together vpon any spetiall occasions of 
trade & Marchandizeinge (viz) lohn Sayris cheefe Captaine and 
Comander, Gabriell Towerson Captaine of the Hector, Tempest 
Peacocke 1 Comander of the Thomas, Richard Cockes, 2 Ambrose 

1 Tempest Peacock was left at the newly-established factory at Firando, in Japan, 
as next in command to Cocks and Adams. In March, 1614, he set out on a trading 
expedition to Cochin China, and was there murdered by the natives not long after 
his arrival. 

3 Richard Cocks held charge of the English factory at Firando from its establish- 
ment in 1613 till its withdrawal ten years later, and died on his way home, 24th 
March, 1624. His Diary whilst in Japan has been published by the Hakluyt Society, 
under the editorship of Mr, E. Maunde Thompson, of the British Museum. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 399 

Armeway, Richard Wickham, 1 Edward Cambden, 2 and George 
Ball, 3 whereof one of them to record whatt matters shall passe, 
all w ch are to aduise and giue their best Counsell and direccon in 
psecuteinge such courses for trade as may be concerned most 
convenient for the good of the voyadge. And for all Sea-fareing 
causes whatsoeu r wee doe likewise appointe a Councell to be 
called together (viz) lohn Sairis cheefe Capt & Comander 
Gabriell Towerson Capt of the Hecto r . Thomas ffuller, lames 
ffoster, Richard Dawes, Mathew Porter, Thomas Barwicke, lohn 
Elmer, and Thomas lones. 

8. Item that the cheefe Captaine & Comander together w th 
the rest of the Counsell appointed for that purpose doe sett 
downe and deliu r such instruccons as may serue for the 
Comanders of thother shipps to keepe Company together for the 
better releefe and Comforte one of an other, And yf separacon 
of them should happen by constrainte of weather or tempest that 
they shall agree of a course before hand & of a place whether to 
applie them selues to finde the rest. 

9 Item that contynueall & true lournalls be kept of eu r y 
daies Nauigacon dureinge the whole voyadge, w th a true relacon of 
eu r y materiall thinge that passeth & this not onlie to be done by 
the cheefe Capt & Comander, Captaine of the Hector but alsoe 
by the Marchauntf pursers, M ra & M rs mates & that some of the 

1 Richard Wickham went out first to the Indies as a factor in the Union in the 
Fourth Voyage. At Zanzibar he was captured by the natives and handed over to the 
Portuguese. By them he was carried to Goa, where he met the traveller Fra^ois 
Pyrard. In 1610 Wickham was sent, with other European captives, to Portugal, 
whence he made his way back to England in time to offer his services for this Eighth 
Voyage. Saris left him with Cocks at the factory at Firando ; and his letter-book 
during a portion of his service there (1614-16) is still preserved among the India Office 
Records. Wickham left Japan in 1618 for Bantam, whence he proceeded to Jacatra, 
where he died not long after, worth, it was said, a large sum of money, accumulated 
in the course of his trading. 

2 Edward Camden was left by Capt. Saris at Bantam as chief factor for the goods 
of the Eighth Voyage, and died there, probably some time in 1613. 

3 George Ball was left by Saris at Bantam, where in March, 1617, he succeeded 
Barkeley as President. Loud complaints were soon made as to his excessive private 
trading, and in 1621 he was brought home a prisoner, and an action entered against 
him in the Star Chamber for 70,000^. The proceedings, however, dragged on very 
slowly, and the case had. not been finally settled when he died (about the beginning 
of 1625). 



4 oo 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



principalls in each shipp may conferr their obseruacons together 
att conuenient tymes, once or twise eu r y weeke att the least to 
the end yf any haue forgotten whatt an other hath obserued the 
same may be added, soe as a pfect discourse may be sett downe to 
be presented to the Gou r nor & Company when God shall graunte 
them a safe retourne to be kept for better direccon of posteritie. 

10 Item Wee Comend vnto yo u the cheefe Capt : & 
Comander principallie, & to the rest of the Comanders & Masters 
as a spetiall care, that att eu r y place where yo u shall water & 
refresh yo r men yo u call the Companies together, giueinge them 
expresse warninge to behaue them selues peaceablie and Ciuillie 
towardf the people of those places the better to pcure their 
freindshipp toward f the supplie of yo r wantes, & the like in eu r y 
place where yo u shall come leaste the losse of yo r Hues & 
ou r throwe of o r voyadge pay for their disorders beside an vtter 
discreditt to o r Nation. And that yo r men doe vse a discreete 
meane in eateinge of fruites and fresh victualls least they surfett 
and fall into diseases whereof wee haue had too much experience. 
And the better to restraine vnrulie appetites, wee hould ytt 
conuenient that the cheefe Captaine & Comander appointe some 
of the discreetest in the Companies to pcure & puide in such 
places whatt yo 11 want, & the same beinge bought & brought to 
the cheefe Captaine and Comander by him to be repted to each 
Companie whatt may be needfull & that none presume to doe the 
contrarie vpon paine of seveare ponishm*. And that espetiall 
care be had to releeue the sicke w th such fresh meates & other 
comfortable thinges wherew th wee haue furnished each shipp 
for that purpose, & not otherwise to be spent in Ryatt 
banquettinge & soe the sicke pishe for want of thinges needfull. 
Where espetiall care must be had that when those that are the 
most weake psonns come to fresh Victualls after longe abstinence 
att Sea they be not sufferred in any wise to eate of those fresh 
meatf w cl1 shall be gotten on shore but that yo u cause such fresh 
victualls as yo u can prouide to be boyled in pottage, till yt be 
sodden in peeces & the cheefe substance lefte in the broth & 
giue them of that broth onelie to feede vpon moderatelie for twoe 
or three daies till their stomackf be somewhatt setled & their 
bodies Comforted. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 401 

11 Item and whereas the straglinge of yo r men in any place 
where they shall arriue or come, may not onlie proue the losse of 
such as shall soe straggle notw th standinge they should be armed, 
but alsoe thereby much hurte might happen to the residue of o r 
people. It is ordered that yo u doe not pmitt any man in any 
place to straggle or goe from the rest of yo r Companies vnlesse 
vpon spetiall occasion yo 11 giue warrant therevnto vpon paine of 
seueare ponishm* to be inflicted vpon such as shall doe to the 
Contrarie, still doubtinge the worste and standinge vpon your 
guard w th out giueinge any trust to the people of the place, 
haueing in remembrance the ou r sight of the Comanders of the 
Vnion to their owne destruction & ou r throwe of the voyadge. 1 

12 Item yt is expreslie ordered by a gen r all Consent of yo u 
the cheefe Captaine and Comander, Capt of the Hector, Cape 
Marchaunt of the Thomas Marchauntf ffactors M rs & Marriners 
some good order be by yo 11 taken and sett downe in writeinge soe 
soone as yo u come to Sea conc r ninge the disposeinge of dead 
mens goodf in the voyadge, either by comittinge the same by 
Inventorie to the pticular keepinge of some men in the shipps, 
and this vpon some convenient Consideracon for keepinge the 
same or by saile of soe much thereof att the maine maste as may 
not exceede a third pte of the buyers wages, for either buyinge or 
borrowinge to prevent such preiudice to o r Companie as wee haue 
felt by Mariners buyinge soe much as their whole wages come 
vnto, whereby they haue not onlie forsaken o r shipps before their 
dischardge, butt alsoe depriued vs of meanes to redresse such 
wrongC as they haue many waies done vs in the voyadge. And 
to order what sallary shall be giuen the purser for keepinge 
accompt thereof to avoied question and Controu r sie hereafter, 
Alsoe that there be noe dealeinge by exchange betwixt ptie and 
ptie neither money for money, Comoditie for money Comoditie 
for Comoditie neither outwardf or homewardf, for such exchange 
giues way for them to bringe more then they should, or take or 
purloyne of o r goodf they ought nott : ffor preuencon whereof 
Wee order that neither the purser, or any other doe register 
witnes, or take knowledge of any such contract by exchaunge. 

1 The reference is to the murder of Rowles and his companions in Madagascar 
(see page 228, note). 

I E 



4 oa FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

And noe man to be admitted meanes to bringe goodc abourd in 
any the shipps more then their Chest appointed them will 
conteyne, and the same goodf to be pticularlie entred in the 
pursers booke vpon paine of forfecture to the Company, that w ch 
shall not be entred, eu r y Marriner & other of the said shipps to 
sett their handf or marke to the said orders mentioned in this 
12 article. And yf any ffactor shall happen to die, his goodf, 
bookes accomptf and other thinges are to be ordered of the 
cheefe Capt Comander & Capt of the Hector & Cape 
Marchaunte of the Thomas to be safelie reserued and brought 
home for England, an Inventorie first taken thereof & registred 
in the pursers booke, to be witnessed by twoe or three other of 
the Companie. 

13 Item for better p r seruacon of health o r order is that from 
tyme to tyme as the water Caske shall be emptied of fresh water, 
ytt be forthw th againe filled w th salt water for preuencon of 
leakidge & mustines. 

14. Item in yo r passadge betweene the Island of S* Lawrence 
& the Coaste of Sophola beware of the flatty of ludea 1 vpon w ch 
flattf it is said thatt the Current doth stronglie run, whereby 
many shipps haue .pished, therefore w th greate care to be avoieded. 

15 Item for the fittest place for refreshinge whether att 
Saldania or att the Bay of S* Augustine in S 1 Lawrence Island, 
wee referr the same to yo r discretions to doe therein as occasion 
may vrdge, still fixinge yo r thoughtf and resolucons to arriue att 
the Barr of Suratt by thend of Septemb next accordinge to o r 
designes, w ch is the maine and principall scope of this o r voyadge, 
w th this further aduise that wheresoeu 1 " yo u shall water yo u 
make noe longer staye then necessitie shall enforce, to thend 
yo u may haue some oportunitie for refreshm* att Succatora there 
to buy some Alloes Sacatrina to the quantitie of fower Tonns, 
where we pray yo u take notice that in the third voyadge William 
Kealeinge bought there twentie fower hundredweight att xx Ryalls 
of eight the hundred pound w ch is io4 u of o rs . 

16 Item wee desire that rather yo u touch att Succatora for 
that wee hope yo u shall meete w th Guzarattf att that place, from 
whome yo u may receiue some intelligence whether William 

1 See page 118, note. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 403 

Hawkins & the rest of o r ffactors lefte att Suratt out of the 
Hector, are liueinge or not, as alsoe of the state of S r Henrie 
Middleton, & of those shipps thatt went w th him, & in whatt state 
o r busines there standeth, whereby yo u may the better there 
gou r ne yo r selues for ^formance of o r desires : Butt yf the time 
of the Monsone be soe farr spent that yo u cannot arriue att the 
Barr of Suratt by thend of Septemb or Middle of Octofe next att 
the farthest, then wee will yo u to take the first oportunitie either 
to saile to Aden or Mocha alls Mochowe w th in the mouth of the 
red Sea, aboute some tenn leagues distant from Aden as wee 
vnderstand. Att w ch porte of Mocha wee haue herd that one of 
the shipps in the fourth voyadge hath traded and where wee 
doubt not you may sell Cloth, leade, Iron, Tynn quicksiluer for 
money or gould for that wee thinke Comodities will be too deare 
in that place consideringe o r purpose that yo u goe to Suratt, 
except yo u may buy Cloues Maces or Nutmeggf att a reasonable 
rate w ch are said to be good Comodities att Suratt as well as here 
in England. In this place yo u must spend the time till oportu- 
nitie doe serue to goe to Suratt w ch will not be till toward^ the 
end of August followinge, soe as you may arriue there by the end 
of Septemb w ch we pray yo u to endevor by all possible meanes 
Butt stayinge att Aden or Mocha haue espetiall care that yo r men 
giue noe offence to the people there, still keepinge good watch & 
standinge vpon yo r guard, and that out of any danger of any 
Castle, forte, or Gallies to preuent mischeefe 

17 Item being arriued att Suratt We desier yo u vse the best 
meanes yo u can presentlie to vnderstand the estate of William 
Hawkins and the rest of o r people there, as alsoe whatt hath 
beene done by S r Hen : Middleton for the setlinge of a c r teine and 
safe trade there. And heareinge thatt all is well then either to 
send vp yo r longe boate in & w th Tobias Cockes & some others 
whome yo u shall thinke fitt, or finde some meanes to cause scma 
of the ffactors there to come abourd yo u , either William ffinche or 
some others of whome take due obseruacon of the estate of the 
Countrie, howe they haue beene accepted of by the kinge, howe 
intreated by the people, whatt priuiledges they haue gott, what 
Comodities of ours are there requested, what they haue of their 
Countries Comodities vpon their handC to be laden, acquainte 

I E I 



4 o 4 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

them alsoe whatt Comodities yo u haue brought & the quantities, 
& takeinge knowledge of their worth there, As alsoe whatt 
Comodities are there presentlie to be had and att what prices 
a swell fittinge for England as Priaman Bantam, Banda & the 
Molloccoes & whether the same may be had w th speede as you 
may take hould of the Monsone to goe into those ptes, What 
forces the Enemies are of, howe readie the Guzarattf are to 
helpe o r Nation, & of all other needfull intelligences, by whome 
(yf yo u be incourradged) wee wishe yo u to send in the Thomas & 
in her Tempest Peacocke o r ffactor w th such Comodities as may 
be most vendible w th all speede, giueinge them warninge to be 
readie to w th stand any Enemies & keepe good watch to preuent 
any mischeefe of fire or otherwise, w ch lett them be assured will 
be practised against them. 

1 8. Item for that we haue puided as yo u knowe and laden in 
theis shipps sundrie Comodities of good value principallie for that 
place, as leade, Tynn, sword bladf, peeces, Cloth, kersies and 
some other thinges accordinge to an Invoice herew th deliu r ed yo u . 
Wee hould yt convenient that as many of the same as yo 11 shall 
thinke fitt may be laden in such fryggottf as can be puided for 
that purpose & the same sent vp to Suratt. Wee pray yo u to 
Consult and take good aduise for the deliu r y of his Ma ties : ires 
nowe sent, whatt present^ are to be deliu r ed, to whome, by 
whome, & in what manner, the same to be done w th what speede 
and dilligence that shall be requisite, consideringe the shortnes of 
the tyme in keepinge the Monson for attaineinge yo r other portes 
for w ch present^ wee haue sent in the Cloue as appeth in the 
Invoice : Out of w ch yo u are to take for quantitie & Coullor 
whatt shall be thought needfull for that purpose, the rest to be 
sould for o r Companies benefitt As alsoe wee haue sent in the 
same shipp i6o oz | ounzes of guilt plate together w th peeces out 
of w ch yf yo u thinke requisitt some alsoe may be giuen for presentf? 
accordinge to aduise of m r Hawkins m r fnnche & the rest. If 
any thinge be presented to the kinge Prince or greate Potentate it 
is to be done as yo u knowe w th state and comlines. ffor presentf 
for meaner psonns wee wishe yo u to chuse out amonge o r Clothes 
such Colors as may be acceptable vnto them for vestes. And for 
the better pformance of this busines & accompanyinge o r cheefe 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 405 

ffactors wee leaue yt to yo v discretion w th the aduise of the rest of 
the Counsell to appointe such as yo u shall thinke fitt, and to 
leaue there soe many & such for ffactors as thoccasions in yo r 
discretions shall necessarilie requier. 

19 Item the busines aforesaid beinge done Consideracon 
is to be had for the deliu r inge & dispatche of o r shipps & yf yo u 
shall finde sufficient meanes either by the helpe of stocke form r lie 
lefte in the Countrie or by the sale of such Marchaundize as yo u 
shall now carrie w th yo u , to lade all the three shipps w th such 
Comodities as may there be had fittinge to be retourned for 
England, wee will you to take that oportunitie to fraight them all 
and lett them be retourned as aforesaid : Or yf meanes may be 
had for the dispatch of twoe then that the Hector and Thomas 
be sent for England vnder the Comand of Gabriell Towerson 
Capt of the Hector in the ladeinge of w ch , or but one of them yo u 
are to obserue this a gen r all order that the good? of eu r y voyadge 
may be m r ked and nombred seu r ally and soe expressed in yo r 
Cargasons, and accomptf that the good of each voyadge may 
be knowne by them selues, for that they doe not conc r ne the 
selfe same Adventurers And hereof therefore you are to be very 
carefull to preuent wronges in ladeinge of goodf. Wee note 
theis as spetiall Comodities w ch wee desier (viz) Indico of the 
very beste aswell flatt as round soe much as yo u may w th o r 
moneys well compasse, other Comodities alsoe beinge to be had, 
but lett yo r care be extraordinary to buy the very best that may 
be had for money, aswell Indico as of all other Comodities, 
Callicoes white tasselled bookf good quantitie & some of the 
courser sortes, Callicoes light colored alsoe as Carnatian, 1 light 
Watchettf , strawe Colors & other light Colors, butt none of them 

1 All along the well- wooded narrow Konkan Coast, and through all the wide 
extended fertile plains of Southern Gujerat, the Hindu women of Western India, of 
the higher castes, have, or had in my time, 22 to 37 years ago, a marked partiality for 
robes (saris) of a single coloured text, contrasted with a pretext (-TrapvQf), clavus) of 
the complementary, or, indeed, any other harmonising colour ; the Hindu weavers 
being able to bring any two colours, even pea-green and purple, and scarlet and 
purple, into perfect unison. In' the Southern Konkan particularly, I found that, 
besides robes of Cardinal white bordered with gold (xpvao-n-apvQos, chrysoclavus), 
the most commonly worn were of marigold or saffron yellow (K-JOOKWTOS) edged with 
Mazarine blue and buff, or primrose yellow edged with pale blue, both universally 
favourite combinations, and of pea green with purple (TrapaXvvpyfjs), and blazing 



406 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

course or sad colors in any manner, in theis yo u may ymploye 
to the valewe of both soe much as yo r stocke will affoorde, 
reguardinge to haue some whatt of other Comodities Gotten 
yearne of the finest well requested Tonns, greene ginger of the 
best and lardgest suchas that of Battecala Twoe Tonns, red 
Saunders wood aboute fyue Tonns Turbith .... Tonns Opium 
ffiue hundred weight. Beniamyn tenn Tonns, Salt Armoniacke 
not much, Olibanu (yf good) not much, Lignum Alices asmuch as 
yo u can gett soe yt exceede not flue Tonns, Wormeseedf cleansed 
asmuchas possiblie may be from the chaffe & dust, by sifteinge 
& wynnowinge for that the dust & chaffe is here worth nothinge, 
to the quantitie of ffortie kintolls, Gumlacke as much as yo u can 
gett of the best and second sorte but none of the worst att any 

scarlet (co(CKo/3a0/;s) with pistachio green, and lastly of carnation, with a pretext of 
either apple green, interthreaded with gold, or deep blue separated from the text of 
carnation by a strip of gold, a chromatic concordance of exquisite refinement. And 
beyond doubt it was the great charm of these Indian stuffs that first made carnation a 
fashionable colour in England. It takes its English name from " the Carnation " [in 
German das Incarnat], or Double Clove Pink, otherwise known as "the Whitsuntide 
[in German Pfingsten} Gilliflower," the Dianthus [Aids avQos, flos Jovis] Caryophyllus 
of botanists ; and this name was not given to it on account of its colour, but is 
corrupted from its earlier English name of "Coronation," given to it on account of 
the use of its flowers for festive chaplets. Thus Spenser in The Shepheardes Calender, 
April, 134-145 : 

" Bring hither the Pincke [Dianthus hortensis} and purple Cullambine 

With Gelliflowres [single ' Clove Pink '] ; 
Bring CORONATIONS and Sops in wine [scented ' Clove Pink ' J 

Worne of Paramoures ; 

Strowe me the ground with Daffadowndillies, 
And Cowslips, and Kingcups, and loved Lillies : 

The pretie Pawnee [ Pansy ']r 

And the Chevisaunce [Cheiranthus Cheiri, the ' Wallflower '], 
Shall match with the fayre floure Delice [Fleur de Lys (i.e. Louis VII.), 

the 'Iris']." 

But already the proper English name of the double Dianthus Caryophyllus was being 
contracted to "Carnation." Lyte, in his Niewe Herbal, 1578, of the tautologically 
named "Clove Gillofers," writes, B. ii., ch. 7: " The greatest and bravest sort of 
them are called Coronations or Cornations"; and, again, Shakespeare in Love's Labour 
Lost (1592), III., i : " Pray you sir, how much Carnation ribbon may a man buy for 
a remuneration " : that is, as I take it, " ribbon (red strips or fillets of silk) for chap- 
lets," or other " head gear " ; although even at this early stage of the decay of the name 
it may have acquired the meaning of red, from its erroneous association with, and, 
indeed, express derivation from, the Italian incarnadine and incarnatino (Florio, 1598), 
literally, "raw-meat-coloured," or "incarnadined"; a word which, until it obtained 
a poetical significance through its erroneous association with "the Coronation," 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



407 



hand, Sugars of the best some fewe Chestes for a triall, silke of 
persia (yf to be had) a good quantitie Theis Cornodities being 
bought and packed w t]l m r chauntlike care to preuent damage 
nombred & marked accordinge to former direccon both of the 
inside and outside for better satisfaccon of the Company in the 
difference of the sort? and content^, the rather for that the 
outmost marke may be by longe lieinge at Sea worne out, the 
same to be laden & the shipps to be dispatched away w th all 
expedicon for England. And nowe as a first busines in dispatch 
to be remembred wee wishe yo u to prouide such Callicoes and 
other Cornodities as may be fittinge for Priaman Bantam Banda 
& the Mollcccoes, & the same being orderlie packed to be shipped 
w th all speede att yo r discrecons for those places w ch w" 1 Rialls of 8 

could never with any propriety be applied to the carnation saris formerly, and I 
hope still, woven by the weavers, and worn by the women, of Ahmedabad, and 
Surat, and Ratnagheri. Equally erroneous is the accepted lexicographical deriva- 
tion of the name, " Garden Pink," of Dianthus hortensis, from its pinked or jagged 
edges. Until the Garden Pink became a familiar flower in this country, pinked 
work was known as pounced, i.e. punched, work. Thus in The Persones Tale 
Chaucer writes of "pounsed and dagged clothing"; and evidently "the Garden 
Pink " gave its name not only to its characteristic colour, and to the cant words 
"pink" a stab, and "pink" in the sense of acme (i.e. "flower, bloom"), as in the 
phrase used by Shakespeare in Romeo and Juliet, IV. ,2 : " The very pink of courtesy," 
but also to the method of ornamenting any textile fabric by notching its edges, and 
piercing it over with eyelet-holes ; a word corrupted from oeillet, the French name 
of the Pink-worts generally, and which reappears in the English name, " Sweet 
Willi-am," of Dianthus barbatus ; a flower much esteemed, writes Gerarde, in 1597, 
" to deck up the bosoms of the beautiful, and garlands and crowns for pleasure." 
In short, the English word pink, in its primary, and all its secondary meanings, is 
but a corruption from the Greek word UfVTrjKonr^, the Harvest Festival held by the 
Jews on the " Fiftieth " day after their Passover, and identified by us with Whitsunday 
[Dominica in Albis], the first annual festival adopted by the Christian Church ; and 
" the Garden Pink " is therefore nothing but " the Whitsuntide flower " [cp. German 
Pfingstrose, " the Peony "]. Chaucer is the first, so far as I know, to use the term 
in his description of the wife of the carpenter of Oxford, in The Miller's Tale, 1. 82 : 

" Sche was a primerole, and a piggesneyghe." 

Some commentators explain the word as meaning that she was pig's-eyed ; while 
others, more sympathetically, but also quite wrongly, as a corruption of " Pansy " ; 
but the word is really Pfingsten-eye [cp. Daisy, in Old English Daieseyghe, i.e. Eye 
of Day], the Eye of Whitsuntide ; which, from the usual time of their flowering, is a 
most appropriate name for almost any European species of Dianthus. What Chaucer 
means is that the carpenter's young wife was sweet as a Primrose, and fair and rosy as 
a Garden Pink, in all the beauty of its full Whitsuntide bloom. 



4 o8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

that wee wishe yo n to receiue for 1 ymploym* att Suratt, as alsoe 
the Iron wee now send, w th lead, & bales w th Cloth prouided for 
Bantam the said shipp to take her first oportunitie to saile for 
Priaman together w th thatt shipp of the other twoe not dispatched 
for England. 

20 Item being arriued att Priaman to make there sale of soe 
much of yo r Iron Callicoes & Pintadoes as yo u shall finde fittinge, 
soe much for gould as yo u may & the rest for large pepp, wherein 
haue espetiall care to buie none greene for breach in weight, but 
such as shall be drie and cleane from dust to the quantitie as yo u 
shall thinke fittinge and some Tenn Tonns of Beniamyn, theis 
Comodities to be weyghed by yo r owne waightf into yo r shipp, 
& the purser to keepe due notice of the same w th such of the 
ffactors as shall be appointed for that purpose, that they may 
be able to giue vs a good accompt thereof. In execution of this 
busines take this for aduise that yo u make showe to be gone from 
thence w th a purpose to buy noe pepp, for that when they pceaue 
you purpose to depte they will offer yo u pepp att much lower rate 
then otherwise. Therefore yt is fitt to seeme vnwillinge to buie, 
& sometymes to make refusall will not be amisse, beside make 
shewe that yo u haue but fewe Callicoes or other Comodities to 
sell the better to giue them edge to buie. In pformance of this 
busines remember still yo r purpose to goe for Bantam & Banda 
that yo u slipp not the oportunitie of the Monson. And soe w th 
whatt yo u haue there taken in, & restinge in the shipp for 
Bantam, there dischardge both Iron, leade, Callicoes, & Cloth &c : 
prepared for that place, for a stocke to puide Lamkin 2 silke of the 
finest and whitest, but noe Canton silke att any hand w th what 
other thinges yo u shall hould needfull against you retourne from 
Banda, whether wee wishe yo u to make all possible hast takeing 
w th yo u such ffactors to leaue there as in yo r ludgm* shall be 
thought meete. And for stocke of the Rialls before mentioned 

1 This should evidently be "reserve from," as on page 338. The whole passage 
seems to have been copied with a few alterations from the corresponding paragraph 
in the Commission for the Sixth Voyage; hence, probably, the further blunder at the 
end of the paragraph, where it is implied that only one ship would be sent home from 
Surat, whereas just before it is stated !that, if possible, all three, or two out of the 
three, were to be laden there, and despatched for England. 

3 See page 286. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 409 

what yo u thinke requisite, and such China stuffy and dishes 
as you may learne att Bantam to be fittinge for the place. 

21. Item being arriued at Banda present such guiftes to the 
Gou r no r or Savander there as in yo r discretion shall seeme fittinge 
& there prouide accordinge to your discretions of Nutmeggf of the 
best and soundest that may be gotten freed from dust and Rumps 
all that may be, remembringe that the same will not be worth the 
freight and chardges. Alsoe Maces the largest and brightest thatt 
may be gotten, but none that is darke colored, red maces w cb are 
called feminine Maces & heare little worth, ffor accomplishinge 
hereof as alsoe for to leaue stocke convenient there for puision 
for a future voyadge, keepe in yo r shipp soe much money & 
Callicoes as you may deeme sufficient. And yf being arriued 
att Banda yo u hould yt possible & finde yt convenient to send to 
the Molloccoes whilest the Nutmeggf and Maces are puideinge 
to seeke for Cloues, and haueinge gotten to yo r Content therein, to 
retourne to Banda there to take in the Mace and NutmeggC & 
w th speede to retourne to Bantam leaueinge a convenient numb of 
ffactors and stocke as shall be needfull at Banda as aforesaid. And 
beinge retourned to Bantam & haueinge brought a true pticuler of 
whatt is lefte at Banda vnder the hand^ of the ffactors there, then 
to take in such silkes & other thingf as shall in yo r absence be 
puided there for London. Where (haueinge setled the busines 
and ffactors in good order & taken a pticular relacon of o r 
accompt and Comodities there lefte, the Coppies whereof to be 
signed by o r ffactors and to be brought alonge w th yo u , and order 
giuen by yo u to keepe accompt of eu r y voyadge by yt selfe, and 
soe of the retournes 1 of eu r y voyadge may haue their right as 
they consiste of diu r sitie of Aduenturers, [)] Then in Godf name 
w th all due speede to retourne for England. And haueinge 

thus farr pceeded in a direct course wee hould yt fitt againe to looke 
backe to thebarr att Suratt and there soe 2 Consider yf thinges fall 
out contrary to expectacon that neither o r people should be there 
in safetie, nor the place fitt for o r trade, nor yett incourradgm 11 

1 Some words have been omitted here ; the gap may be supplied from the corre- 
sponding passage in the commission for the Sixth Voyage (see page 340), which is 
followed almost word for word. 

2 To? 



4IO FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

to pursue the same any farther. In reguard of the Comodities 
puided fitt for the seruice of thatt place and Aden, & not els 
where w th in o r knowledge, o r expresse order is that vpon notice 
of the premisses yo u forthw th w th the Monson retourne for Aden 
or Moccha in the red Sea, yf in yo r passadge to Suratt yo 11 haue 
not visitted the same & done what might be done for the vent 
of o r Comodities, and there to trie for dispatch and vent of o r said 
Marchandize, w ch beinge effected accordinge to our Desires 
yf possiblie you may be fitted by the Junckf arriueinge there from 
diu r s portes out of the Indies w th Marchandize fittinge for England 
to lade either one or twoe or all of o r shipps w th the same goodf 
brought thither as namelie smooth pepp, druggf of all sortf 
fittinge for this place, Indico of the best sorte, Nutmeggf, maces, 
Synamon, Callicoes, Beniamyn, Olibanu, Mirr, Opium, red 
Saunders, Lignum Alloes, & such like, & the shipp or shipps 
soe laden w th speede to direct their course for England. And 
yf any of the shipps remaine vnladen then w th such Callicoes 
as yo u can buie of the lunckes fittinge for Priaman Bantam 
Banda or the Molloccoes to saile directlie for Pryaman & there 
to pursue trade & from thence further as aforesaid as in yo r 
discretion shall seeme best. 

22 Item wee thinke yt not amisse further to aduise yo u that 
findinge faile of trade at Suratt you endevo 1 whilest yo u are there, 
to inuite the Guzarattf w th such Comodities as you looke for, 
to repaire to the portC of Delisha or Tamarie att the Island 
of Succotara where you may agree to deale w th them for the 
same, w ch yf yo u doe, yo u and they alsoe shall saue much 
Customes yo u shall pay in other portes to the Gou r no r thereof, 
Itt is to be vnderstoode thatt yf noe trade be to be had att Suratt 
there shall be noe cause to settle any ffactors there, In such case 
wee appointe all o r ffacto rs now sent to pceede w th yo u to Aden 
or Mocha, or to such other place as yo u shall thinke fitt to direct 
yo r course for benefitt of trade And finding any such place as 
may be beneficiall to o r Company aswell for vent of Cloth and 
other our English Marchandizes as for Comodities of those 
Countries fittinge for this wee referr to yo r discrecon the setlinge 
of o r ffactorie there, and the appointem 1 of any of o r ffactors 
to recide there w th such stocke as in yo r ludgm* may seeme 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 411 

Competent to defray their chardge & make puision of Comodities 
w ch that Countrie may yeald against the arriuall of a second 
supplie : Butt findinge noe such place, & pceedinge to Bantam 
o r order is thatt the ymploym* of o r shipps for .pformance of their 
ladeinge bee att yo r direccon to procure sufficient ladeinge for the 
Hector & Thomas of such Comodities as shall be most fitt for 
sale in England & to speede them away thither vnder the 
conduct & Comand of Capt Towerson as was said before for 
Suratt. In the search of w ch trade yo u are to vnderstand that 
att Makassa an island neare Celebres there is greete store of Rice 
w ch b em g e carryed to Banda will yeald three for one, att w dl 
Island there may be had 100 Tonns of Nutmeggf & Mace as is 
informed. 

23. Item the Hector and Thomas beinge fraighted & sent for 
England then wee wishe yo u Capt lohn Sairis to pceede w th the 
Cloue, & w th all possible speede thatt yo u may endevor yo 1 ' course 
for lapan, haueinge before att Bantam or ells where dilligently 
aduised inquired & conferred w th o r ffactors, or any other the best 
meanes yo u may attaine vnto the knowledge whereby to informe 
yo r selfe for or conc r ninge o 1 ' intended voyadge to lapan, and 
to pcure in any of those ptf (yf you may[)] some skilfull pilate 
experienced in those Coastes, and take him alonge w th yo u , 
directinge yo r course from thence to lapan, neglectinge noe tyme 
butt takeinge the benefitt and aduantage of those Wyndf and 
Monsons as yo 11 shall most c r teinlie & trulie informe yo r selues, 
& learne that they blowe in their seasons. And in all theis yo r 
passadges & traffiques o r desire is that yo u should informe yo r selfe 
of safe harbors and places of repaire for vent of o r English 
Comodities either aboute the porte of Dabull neare Suratt, or the 
riuer Syndus & Laree, or the Cape of Rosalgate or any Coaste 
of the ptc of Arabia where yo u may haue kinde interteynem* 
of 1 freedome from Enimies, to w ch places yo u may assay to inuite 
Mores, Guzarattf or any other people tradeinge in those ptf w th 
such Marchandize as may be fitt for this Countrey, and be 
rendred for such as wee shall send att such times as yo u may 
suppose o 1 ' shippinge may w th Conveniencie arriue there. Amongst 
w ch portf wee hould the postf aforesaid in the Island of Succatora 

1 Or? 



4 i2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

&c : to be most fittest aswell for the nearnes of the place as 
saueing of Customes & the highe way for the Guzarattf & other 
tradeinge into the red Sea att their ordinarie seasons. 

24. Item and being arriued att lapan wee desier yo u to vse 
the best meanes to search out the most convenient and safest 
harbour to trade in, where you may sell Cloth leade, Iron & such 
other of o r Natiue Comodities as by yo r obseruacon yo u shall finde 
most vendible there, wherein yo u are to be very spetially carefull 
both whatt Colors and sortes of Cloth, and for whatt quantitie 
will there be vented, as alsoe to giue greate chardge that yo r men 
offer noe offence to the people there, still keepinge good watch 
and standinge vpon yo r guard & that out of the danger of any 
Castle fforte or other Gallies or friggott^ to prevent any mischeefe 
that may happen, & to consult and take good aduise w th the 
rest of the ffactors & espetiallie w th William Adams 1 an English 
man nowe resident there, and in greate favo r w th the kinge as wee 
heare to desire his opinion whatt course should be held both for 
the deliu r y of his Ma*f ires nowe sent, whatt presentf are to 
geuen, to whome, by whome & in whatt manner the same is to 
be done w th all dilligence that shall be requisitt, obserueing care- 
fully the tymes in keepinge the Monsons in all places wheare you 
shall trade for attayneinge to other portes as occasion shall be 
offered And for presenntf wee haue sent w th yo u as appeareth in 
the Invoice. 

25 Item and as yo u shall receiue incourradgm* in the 
progresse of yo r affaires by the pswasion of the foresaid William 
Adams grounded vpon his longe experience in those partes & 
shall finde that ytt may be w th saffetie, as beinge ptected vnder 
the authoritie of the kinge of the Country, & may proue 
Comodious and beneficiall for the good of the Company. Then 

1 The story of William Adams, who lived in Japan for twenty years, and was "in 
" such favor with two emperors of Japan as never was any Christian," has often 
been told, and may be found admirably summarized in the Dictionary of National 
Biography. He sailed in 1598 as pilot to a Dutch fleet bound for the Indies, but his 
vessel got separated from her consorts, and with difficulty reached the coast of Japan 
in April, 1600. Adams was sent up to the court, where he speedily succeeded in 
gaining much influence over the emperor. In October 1611, he placed himself in 
communication with the Company's factors at Bantam ; but his story was already 
known through the Dutch, and, as we see, the Company at home had some months 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 413 

w th the Counsell of Richard Cockes and such principall men as 
are in yo r shipp, yo u may aduise resolue and leaue such ffactors 
as yo u in yo r discrecon shall thinke fitt w th such a quantitie of 
goodf as shall be by yo u thought convenient for the setlinge of a 
factorie & mainteyneing of a trade att lapan together w th soe 
many and such sufficient Marriners to attend them and guard o r 
said goodf as yo u shall finde to be needfull & necessarie & to 
puide them a good and stronge howse for the better saffetie of 
such goodc as shall be lefte there in chardge w th them. Butt yf 
yo u shall finde att Japan [no] convenient meanes of ventinge o r 
Comodities or the retourne of proffitt not to awnsweare the 
length and difficultie of the voyadge, or the dangers in psecute- 
inge this trade to exceede w th out pporcon the advantage to be 
hoped, then yo u shall frame yo r course & seeke vent for such 
Comodities as yo u haue either att the Molloccoes, Philippines or 
any other places thereabout^ , whether you may be incourradged 
by any <pbable hopes of peaceable and pffittable tradeinge. And 
yf att yo r depture from lapan the said William Adams shall 
ymportune yo u to transporte him into his natiue Countrie to visitt 
his wife and Children, Wee pray yo u then to accomodate him 
w th as convenient a Cabben as yo u may and all other necessaries 
w ch yo r shipp may afford him. 

26 Item wee ordeine that such of the ffactors as shall 
remaine in the shipps at the buyinge of any good shall be 
ymployed to weighe the same, pay the money & keepe due 
accompte thereof, & nothinge be done either in buyinge or sellinge 
any goodf w th out their priuitie that they may write the same into 
their bookf , and be able to giue vs reason for what is bought or 
sould, and to acquainte the Capt eu r y night w th what they haue 
done that day. That the purser be continuallie abourd the shipp 

before made arrangements to open up trade with Japan. On Saris's arrival, in June, 
1613, Adams accompanied him to court, and assisted in procuring the necessary 
privileges. He did not, however, avail himself of the opportunity of returning home 
in the Clove, but took service with the Company as second in command of the factory 
established by Saris at Firando. He made several voyages to Siam and other places 
in the Company's interests, and even after he had quitted their service in 1616, he 
made himself useful in many ways to his countrymen. He died on the i6th May, 
1620, and was buried on one of the hills overlooking Yedo harbour, where his grave 
may still be seen. 



4 i4 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

& take true notice of all thinges vvhatsoeu r are brought into the 
shipps or carried out, & to enter the same in his booke as hee will 
awnsweare ytt w th the losse of his wages And yo u the Capt to 
giue the purser stricte chardge in this behalfe, & that the pursers 
booke and the ffactors shall then be compared together, soe thatt 
yt may appeare whether all that hath beene bought, hath beene 
receiued into the shipp, & there weyed aswell as on the shore, 
notice to be taken what is wantinge, & inquirie what is become 
thereof, and the same accomptf for whatt hath beene then done 
att lapan, the Molloccoes or ellswhere be registred in o r bookf 
att Bantam. 

27 Item for that voyadges of this Condicon & charge cannot 
admitt any priuate trade, but whatsoeu r is atchiued by this 
generall and greate charge should be applied to the benefitt of the 
whole Companie. Therefore wee sett ytt downe as an absolute 
order that noe man neither Captaines, Marchauntf, Masters or 
Marriners or any other pson or psons whatsoeu r in theis o r shipps 
doe trade or deale for any Marchandize whatsoeu r w ch wee shall 
prouide for o r retourne, or any other sorte of Marchandize more 
then will be conteyned w th in his pporcioned Chest of allowaunce 
for this voyadge and the same to be registred in the pursers booke 
to thend that yf any pson die vpon the voyadge, their freindc and 
Executors may knowe whatt they had, & take notice what is 
become of the same, houldinge ytt most vnreasonable that those 
that Hue by o r ymploym 1 should deale w th the Comodities w ch wee 
labor to gett to produce meanes for paym* of their wages, and 
defrayinge of the chardges of this o r greate and costlie voyadge. 

28 Item wee order that noe pson whatsoeu r w ch shall 
succeede by appointment other otherwise in any place of Comand 
or office either in o r shipps or in any of o r ffactories shall take or 
be allowed the wages of his predecessor, butt thoughe he be 
remoued, preferred, or come to any such place or office he shall 
content himselfe w th such wages as wee haue form r lie agreed w th 
him for, w th out any further demand or incroatchm* vpon the 
Company for the same, butt the pties to be referred to be 
rewarded by the Company att their retourne as they shall be 
found to haue deserued, Nor ffactors Masters, Mates nor other 
Officers of espetiall place in o r shipps to be remoued w n 'out 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 415 

consent of such of the Counsell as wee haue appointed to aduise 
w th yo u the Captaine vpon all such occasions, and not to thinke 
vpon authoritie sett vpon yo u that the same should serue for any 
yo r pticuler respectf , knowinge that a wise man is best tried when 
he is putt in authoritie, and that he is accompted of more 
fortitude that ou r cometh himselfe then he that preuaileth against 
a multitude. 

29 Item wee doe expreslie chardge yo u the Captaines & 
Comanders not to suffer any Cabbins to be new built or altered, 
nor pticions pulled downe, in o r shipps, nor chandged from the 
state they nowe are in, att the settinge out of the same, except 
for inlardgeinge of the houldf or makeinge better prouision for 
the bringinge home of o r goodf , and that by the aduice of the 
Counsell, or for the better accomodateinge of their fightc l yf 
neede shall be. 

30 Item forasmuch as the tymes are very dangerous throughe 
piraces w ch doe dailie increase and abound in all partes vpon the 
Seas both att Saldania & ells where, wee doe chardge yo u there- 
fore to take espetiall care that dilligent & contynuall watch be 
kept abourd to preuent all suddaine inuasion & not to giue light 
Creditt to the faire speeches & pretences of any straungers either 
English or others. 

31 Item wee forbid all vnnecessary expences of shooteinge of 
Ordinance att drinkinge of healthes or att the Captaines or cape 
Marchaunt^ goeinge a shore or such like for that thereby much 
powder is wastfully consumed and o r goodf and shipps putt in 
much hazard and danger, and likewise by yt way is giuen to the 
Gunners vnder color thereof to ymbecill the same. 

32 Item for auoidinge confucon in the Gou'nm* of o r people & 
for that nothinge is soe vnc r teine as the estate of mans life Wee 
ordeine that yf God shall call yo u Captaine lohn Sairis (w ch God 
defend) & that before the sendinge away of the Hector then that 
o 1 ' loueinge freind Gabriell Towerson shall succeede you and 
exercise yo r chardge and after his decease m r : Rich : Cockf whoe 
wee trust will soe behaue them selues therein as shall awnswere 
the good opinion wee haue conceiued of them. Butt yf the said 
Capt Gabriell Towerson and Richard Cock be dented out of this 

1 See page 376, note. 



4 i6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

world or be sent away vpon any other occasion, then we comitt 
the gou'nm* of o r shipps and Marriners therein, to such as wee 
haue nomynated in a wryting subscribed by the gou r nor and 
sealed w th the scale of the Comp : putt vp in a boxe N: I. sealed 
w th hard waxe & deliu r ed to Captaine John Sairis to be kept close 
and not openned soe longe as the said Capt lohn Sairis & Capt 
Gabriell Towerson, or either of them shall liue, or their shipps 
continue together. 'Prouided alwaies that noe pson \vhatsoeu r 
w ch shall succeede in the foresaid place of go^nm*, or any other 
place or office, shall demand be allowed or expect the wages of his 
predecessor but shall content himselfe w th his first wages 
promysed him by the Company or referr him selfe to be 
considered of accordinge to his desert^ att his retourne by the 
Gou r nor Deputy & Comittees of the Company for the tyme 
beinge, whoe haue ever respected men that shall deserue well of 
them. 

33. Item and for that in sundrie voyadges heretofore the 
Company haue beene much wronged by the Generalls Captaines 
and Masters of their shipps in takeinge diu r s psons into the same 
shipps & carrying them alonge w th them in the said voyadge to 
the East Indies for their pticuler gaine and proffitt & haue lefte 
the same pties amonge o r Companies ffacto in the Indies where 
they haue driuen and handled for them selues and their freindf a 
pticular trade to the greate chardge and hindrance of o r Company 
& haue practised w th o r ffactors there to deceiue vs, & to convey 
sundry of the richest comodities of those ptes to their priuate 
vses. Itt is therefore o r expresse order and direccon to yo u 
Captaine lohn Sairis, Captaine Gabriell Towerson & Tempest 
Peacocke, and to all other the MarchauntC ffactors Masters 
pursers & Marriners & eu r y other pson or psonns interteyned and 
hired to serue in this said voyadge, that neither yo u , or any of yo u 
shall admitt or suffer to passe in, or receiue into any of o r said 
shipps in this o r nowe intended voyadge any pson or psons of 
whatt degree or qualitie soeu r other then such pson or psons as 
are interteyned and hired by the Gou r nor & Comittees of o r said 
Company to passe therein & mentioned in the pursers booke. 

34 Item yf yo u shall finde in yo r trauells (or can convenientlie 
come by[)] any faire birdc or beastC or any other rare thinge fitt 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 417 

for vs to present to his Ma tie : or any of the noble Lordf that are 
o r honorable freindf, Wee pray and requier yo u all to be carefull 
to prouide & send the same w th espetiall charge to some carefull 
man or men that retourne to see them carefullie kept & deliu r ed 
to vs : And w^all yf yo u shall knowe any Marriners or others to 
haue any such, that yo u cannot pcure from them for reason then 
that yo u send vs notice thereof to thend wee may take order 
therein accordinglie. 

35 Item in respect of the dangers o r men haue form r lie run 
into by vndertakinge their voyadges out of the Indies att 
vnseasonable times, therefore wee chardge yo 11 all expreslie that 
att what places soeu r the shipps shall be laden yo u be carefull 
presentlie to take the right Monsones in eu r y place & not to beate 
vp & downe, but rather to attend the true seasonns : & haue yt 
spetially in remembrance that the portingalles make choise of the 
fine of lanuarie & prime of ffebruarie to beginne their voyadge 
from those partf , w ch tyme will bringe yo u vpon o r Coastes either 
in Maye or lune : And att w ch tyme the weather is seasonable 
here in theis partes whereas by former wofull experience wee 
haue found the could att their retourne to be the ou r throwe of o r 
people. 

36 Item whereas wee haue giuen o r direccons in former 
articles for the pcuringe of trade att Suratt Bantam, the 
Molloccoes lapan or els where : yett notw th standinge wee leaue 
yt to the discrecon & best iudgm* of our cheefe Captaine and 
Comander for the tyme beinge w th the rest of the Counsell 
appointed for that purpose, to take the oportunitie either of theis 
or any other places where by informacon yo u may receiue the best 
hopes of trade in any partc of the Indies. 

37. Item yf yo u shall learne by true informacon that yo u may 
haue safe passadge vp to Goga wee suppose yt will proue as 
beneficiall to shape yo r course directlie thither, as to putt ou r the 
barr to Suratt for that the Comodities of Cambaia are brought 
downe as plentifully to Goga as to Suratt : Butt herein as before 
wee referr yo u to further aduice & to the due Consideracon thereof 
as yo u shall be incourradged att yo 1 ' comeinge into those partes. 

38. Item whereas the stores appteyneinge to eu r y pticuler 
office, are nowe sufficientlie furnished for this voyadge & Invoices 

I F 



4 r8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

deliu r ed vnto the Captaines and Comanders in eu r y shipp of eu r y 
pticular store, w ch heretofore in some of o r former voyadges haue 
throughe the remisnes of some of o r Comanders bene ymbecilled 
& appropriated to mens pticular vses : ffor the better preuentinge 
therefore of the like inconveniences hereafter : wee ordeine and 
giue ytt in chardge vnto yo u all the Captaines & Comanders of o r 
shipps thatt yo u cause true notice to be taken & a iust accompt 
kept of the expence of the Gunners Carpenters Boatsonns 
Steward^ and eu r y such store both by the purser & some others 
that yo u shall appointe therevnto That att yo r retourne wee 
may receiue from you a iust accompt of eu r y pticuler to be 
awnsweared accordinge to the Invoice nowe deliu r ed vnto yo u : 
And howe the same haue beene spent & disposed of. 

39 Item forasmuch as o r ffactors att Bantam & elswhere 
haue heretofore receiued and paid them selues such wages as 
haue beene due vr.to them for their sallarie, & ymployed there in 
priuate tradeinge for their owne pticuler gaine w th the greate 
neglect of o 1 " 8 , appropriateinge all the riche and pretious thingf to 
their owne vse and nothinge for the Company butt pepp and 
grosse Comodities wee doe therefore resolue and sett yt downe 
for an expresse order hereafter to be obserued That no ffactor 
or other ymployed in o r said seruice shall be pmitted to receiue, 
or take in those partes such wages as shall growe due vnto them, 
[( ]but onlie soe much as shall be necessarie for their apprell) & 
such vses accomptinge & alloweinge after the rate of v 8 for eu r y 
Ryall of eight. And the rest of their wages to be paid in 
England to such as they shall consigne them vnto, accordinge to 
the agreem* made w th eu r y one in pticuler att the tyme of their 
interteynem*. 

40 Item to prevent disorders & misbehauio 1 " 3 of the Marriners 
of theis o r shipps, either in their passadge out, or retourne home, 
vpon o r Coastes : wee ordeyne that yo u suffer none of o r fore- 
said shipps either outwardf or homeward^ to goe into any of 
the port? of ffalmouth, Plimouth, or Darthmouth vnlesse greate 
necessitie compell yo u therevnto. 

And lastlie, haueinge remembred whatt wee thinke needfull 
for yo r direccon in this voyadge and relyinge vpon yo r dilligence 
& care in pursueinge our busines to o r most advantage, Wee 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 419 

comitt yo u to the proteccon of the Almightie God whome wee 
beseech to blesse yo r endevo rs & graunte yo u a safe passadge & 
safe retourne to all o r Comfortes. 

41 Item for the better comforte and recreation of such of o r 
ffactors as are recideinge in the Indies : wee haue sent the 
workf of that worthie seruant of Christe M r : W m : Perkins to 
enstruct their myndf & feede their soules w th thatt heauenlie 
foode of the knowledge of the trueth of Godf word, & the booke 
of Martirs in twoe voleumes, as alsoe M r Hackluitf Voyadgf to 
recreate their spirittf w th varietie of historic : w ch bookes wee 
desier to haue lefte w t]l m r Lawrence ffemell o r cheefe Agent or 
some other o r cheefe ffactor in those partes where most of o r 
people shall be resident to remaine there for the Comforte and 
vses before mentioned, where wee requier that they should haue 
espetiall care to sanctine the Sabboth daye, & to reade vpon 
those devyne bookf for the instruccon and comforte of all those 
that shall be there remayninge. 1 

42 Item whereas by wofull experience wee found a mayne 
error comitted by the Commanders, & all others that were in the 
Assention, for that seinge her in the extremitie of dangers vpon 
her casteinge, they did not vse such present and speedie meanes 
for the safeguard of such moneys as was remayneinge in her, ffor 

1 The works of the Rev. William Perkins (1558-1602), Fellow of Christ's College, 
Cambridge, whose name is now almost forgotten, enjoyed at this time considerable 
popularity both in England and abroad, and he was regarded as one of the ablest 
exponents of the Calvinism then so much in vogue. His collected works were four 
times reprinted during the ten years succeeding his death. The " Book of Martyrs " 
is of course John Foxe's " Actes and Monuments," of which a sixth edition had just 
appeared. 

Had Femell survived, and succeeded in establishing a permanent factory at Surat, 
as the Company hoped, these books would doubtless have formed the nucleus of a 
library there, such as was actually established at a later date. That the Company's 
agents were not indifferent to literature, and especially to theological literature, is 
shewn by the following extract from a letter addressed to the Court by the President 
(Sir George Oxinden) and Council of Surat, under date 25th September, 1666: 

" Your Library here is carefully looked after and preserved, and wee could wish it 
" were better furnished with Bookes. It consists for the maine of English Treatises 
" and is almost totally disfurnisht of the workes of the Ancient Writers; wee finde 
"not of all the ffathers workes, anymore then the Epistles of Clemens Romanus 
" published by M r Patrick Young, here are the Epistles of Ignatius. The workes 
" of Epiphanius & S l Augustine, with some few imperfect peeces of other ffathers, 

I F I 



4 2 o FIKST LETTER BOOK OF 

prevencon therefore of the like error & maine oversight hereafter, 
wee aduise & expreslie giue ytt in chardge, that yf ytt should 
please God to send the like Crosse vpon any of theis o r shipps 
\v cb he for his mercies sake, w th hould, that then in the like 
extremitie The Comanders Officers & all others doe vse their 
best care skill and power, to convaye away to land all such 
Chestes of money w ch shall then be restinge or remayneinge in 
the said shipps by there boatf or for want of such Conveyance, 
to boye ytt into the seas, that afterward^ some better meanes 
may be pcured for recou r y and safeguard thereof. 

43 Item wee requier yo u that you send vs a pticular Invoice 
of eu r y shipps Cargason by the rest of the shipps, And [of] that 
yo u leaue on gen r all Cargason att Bantam to be sent by the next 
shipps thatt shall come from thence, that thereby the Company 
may be satisfied, whatt goodf you haue sent yf ought should 
happen to the other shipps, (then well) w ch God forbid. And 
therefore faile yo n not in any wise, as you respect vs & o r loue. 

lohn Sayris 

Gabriell Towerson 



"but belonging to a private Library. Our desire is, y* you would be pleased to 
" furnish y e Library with a supply of some of the Ancient Writers, and if you shall 
" thinke it good with these, or some part of them y* follow. 

" Bibliotheca veterum Patrum, Hieronymi opera 

" Justini Martyris opera Gregorij magni opera 

" Tertulliani opera Clementij Alexandrini 

" Ambrosij opera opera, ex editione heasij 

" And because wee have not any thing in y e Library of the Ancient Councells, wee 
"could wish for the Collection of them by Binnius ; unto w ch , if you please to add a 
41 booke entitled Pugio fidei, Authore Raymundo Martini, ordinis Cecistrensis. with 
"the Corpus Juris Canonici, wee shall thankfully receive them; as being Bookes 
" here very usefull. There are in your Library 6 volumes fairely bound in blew 
" Turkey Leather and gilded on the Leaves, the gift of Thomas Rich, Esq r , containing 
" the holy Bible with its severall ancient versions, into the orientall Languages. Wee 
" are now given to understand y 4 there is a Lexicon printed in two volumes designed 
" as a helpe for the easier attainment of the said Languages, Our request is y fc you 
" will be pleased to send us y* Lexicon, whereby the booke will be perfected, & that 
" Bible rendered aboundantly more usefull then at present it is." (0. C. 3185.) 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 



The Ires caryed by ye Dutchme 



421 




[AMES by the grace of Almightie God, kinge of greate 
Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland defender of the 
Christian faith : To the To the highe and mightie 
kinge the kinge of Tedore &c : greetinge. 
The good treatm* w ch o 1 ' Subiectf haue from tyme to tyme 
TO the kinge of receiued in their trade w th in yo r Countreys (of 
Tedore - w ch they haue not ceast to make the best relacon 

w th all due acknowledgm* of yo r benigne & favorable dispotition 
toward^ them) hath incourradged them againe, to make an other 
voyadge thither, by occasion whereof wee hould ytt not ymptenent 
but to expresse o r gratious acceptaunce of yo r loue & Amity 
shewed to o r said Subiectf, & to* intreate the Contynuance 
thereof, toward^ all others of o rs as shall from tyme to tyme 
resorte vnto yo u ; and more pticularlie to recomend vnto yo u the 
bearers hereof Peter Flores Lucas Antheumes Robert Browne and 
others, whoe nowe w th o r good likeinge and pmission doe repaire 
vnto yo u in the good shipp called the Globe, Not doubting but as 
the effect^ of their Comerce cannot but redound to the good and 
aduancem* of yo r Countrey and people soe yo u will afford them 
yo r Royall pteccon w th all the respectf of Courtesie and freindshipp 
w ch wee will be readie to affoord toward^ any of yo rs yf they shall 
arriue into any of o r Territories. And soe wee pray Almightie 
God to prosp yo u and to make yo u victorious against yo r 
Enemies, ffrom o r Royall Pallace att Westminster this. 




AMES by the grace of Almightie God kinge of greate 
Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland defender of the 
Christian faith &c : As there is nothinge w ch 
Increaseth more the glorie and dignitie of Sou r eigne 

1 i.e. Floris and Antheumis in the Seventh Voyage (see page 363, note). The ships of 
the Seventh and Eighth Voyages started within a few months of one another. Hence, 
probably, the confusion in the present volume between the papers of the two expe- 
ditions. 



4 2i FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Princes vpon earth then to extend their renowne vnto farr dis- 
sident Nations, Soe haueing vnderstoode of late 

Alettertoallprincep, ...... . . 

goiirno", &c in the yeares from some of o r loueinge subiectf, that haue 

East Indies for the J 

secure trade of the traded into diu r s Countries neare adioynemge 

Marchauntes ^ J 

vnto yo of the reputacon & greatnes of yo r power 
and dominion, wee haue incourradged o r said Subiectf to vndcr- 
take a voyadge into yo r Countrey, aswell to solicitt yo r freindshipp 
and amity w th vs, as to enterchaundge such Comodities of each 
others Countreys, as may be most of vse the one to the other, 
beinge nothinge doubtfull, but such will be yo r Princelie magnani- 
mitie and disposition as to be ready to embrace this o r desier, & 
not onlie to receaue o r people w th yo r accustomed benignitie and 
favo r , butt for their better incourradgem*, to afford them yo r Ryall 
proteccon for the setlinge of a ffactory there, w th such securitie & 
lifotie of Comerce as shall be most convenient for the aduancm* of 
the mutuall proffitt and Comodities of each others Subiectf ; 
Wherein for o r parte wee doe willingly offer o r selfe & the libtie 
of o r kingdomes and Countries, whensoeu r any of yo r subiectf 
shall vndertake to haue comunication w th vs. And soe wee pray 
vnto Almightie God to blesse and prosp yo u , and make yo u 
victorious against yo r Enemies, ffrom o r Pallace at Westminster 
this of January in the eight yeare of o r Reigne of 

greate Brittaine ffraunce & Ireland. 1 



(AMES 2 by the grace of Almightie God kinge of greate 
Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland, defender of the 
Christian faithe &c : to the highe and mightie Prince 
the Emperour of lapan &c : greetinge. Most highe 
and mightie Prince As there is nothinge w ch increaseth more 
TO the Emperor of * ne ^one and dignitie of Sou r eigne Princes vpon 
Iapan- earth, then to extend their renowne vnto farr 

discident Nations; Soe haueing vnderstoode of late yeares from 

1 1610/11. 

3 This letter seems to be wrongly placed, and is probably the one carried out by 
Captain Saris in the Eighth Voyage. The Royal letter to the "kinge" of Japan, 
commending the Seventh Voyage to his favour, is given later on (page 426). 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 423 

some of o r loueinge Subiectf that haue traded into diu r s Countries 
neere adioyneinge vnto yo rs , of the reputacon and greatnes of yo r 
power & dominion : Wee haue incourradged o r said subiectf to 
vndertake a Voyadge into yo r Countrey, aswell to solicitt yo r 
freindshipp and Amity w th vs, as to enterchange such Comodities 
of each others Countreys as may be most of vse the one to the 
other, beinge nothinge doubtful], but such will be your princelie 
magnanimitie and disposition as to be readie to ymbrace this o r 
desier, & not onlie to receiue o r people w th yo r accustomed 
benignitie and favor, butt -for their better encouradgm*, to affourd 
them yo r Royall pteccon for the setlinge of a ffactorie there, w th 
such securitie and lifetie of Comerce, as shall be most convenient 
for the aduancem* of the mutuall proffitt and Comoditie of each 
others SubiectC ; Wherein for o r parte, wee doe willinglie offer o r 
selues and the libtie of o r kingdomes and Countres whensoeu r any 
of yo r Subiect^ shall vndertake to haue comunicacon w th vs. And 
soe wee pray Almightie God to blesse and prosp yo u , and to make 
yo u victorious against your Enemies : ffrom o r Pallace at West- 
minster, this of January in the Eight yeare of o r Reigne 
of Create Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland. 




by the grace of Almightie God kinge of greate 
Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland defender of the 
Christian faith &c : To the highe and mightie Prynce 
the kinge of Bantam &c : Greetinge. The good 
treatm* w ch our Subiectf haue receiued in your Countreis, as yt 
TO the kinge of incourradgeth them to continue their trade and 
entercourse w th yo r people, soe yt giueth vs occa- 
sion more and more to ymbrace yo r freindshipp, and to offer the 
like reciprocasion from vs toward any of yo rs , that will happelie 
vndertake soe longe a voyadge hetherwardf . In the meane time, 
theis o r subiectf resortinge vnto you in their good shipp called 
the Cloue, 1 We haue thought good to recomend them vnto yo r 

1 The Clove, which was Saris's ship in the Eighth Voyage, seems to have been 
mentioned here in error for the Globe. The letter to the King of Bantam carried out 
by Captain Saris has already been given on page 393. 



424 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

fauorable saueguard and pteccon, to the end they may enioye the 
same libtie and safetie in yo r dominions, & receiue such incour- 
radgm* for the aduancem* of their trade and traffique, as some 
others of o haue heretofore enioyed, to the good contentm* and 
furtheraunce of the Comon vtilitie of each others Countries, 
wherein because wee hope yo u will not be backward, wee will 
forbeare to trouble yo 11 any further, Prayinge Almightie God to 
blesse and prosp yo u , & to make yo u victorious against yo r 
Enemies, ffrom o r pallace att Westminster this of 

January in the eight yeare of o r Raigne of greate Bryttaine 
ffraunce and Ireland. 




I AMES by the grace of Almightie God kinge of greate 
Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland, defender of the 
Christian faith, To the highe and mightie kinge of 
Gresicke 1 &c: Greetinge. The reporte we haue heard 
from o* loueing subiectf, that haue traded in the East Indies, 
TO the kin e of both f v r power and greatnes, and of yo r 
Gresecke. Princelie and favorable disposition to cherish 

and interteyne all sortes of Strangers, that doe resorte into yo r 
Countries, hath incouradged the bearers hereof Peeter Flores 
Lucas Antheumes Rofet Browne and others w th o r good appro- 
bacon and likeinge, to vndertake a voyadge thither, aswell to 
sollicitt yo r freindshipp and Amitie w th vs, as to enterchaunge 
such Comodities as may be most of vse to each others Countreys, 
being Confident that yo 11 will be readie to ymbrace this o r desire, 
and not onelie receaue o r people w th yo 1 ' accustomed favor to 
others, butt for their better encourradgm* to affourd them yo r 
Royal pteccon, for the setlinge of their trade & Comerce in those 
partes, w th such Condicons of securitie and safetie as shall be 
most convenient for the aduancem* of the mutuall proffitt & 
utilitie of each others Countries : We haue geuen in chardge to 
o r people to demeane them selues w th all respect? of Courtesie 

1 Gresik or Grissee, a town in the district of the same name, near Soerabaja, on 
the north-east coast of Java. The Dutch for some time had a factory there. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 425 

and freindshipp toward^ o rl people, not doubtinge but that there 
pceedinge will proue as acceptable to you as heretofore they haue 
beene to yo r neighbour kinges and Countries, w th whome the 
haue traded to their good contentm* & that in Conformitie 
thereof you will expreslie chardge and Comand yo r Gou r nors and 
Vassalls to ayde and assiste them in their neede & necessities, as 
wee will be ready to doe the like to yo rs , yf happilie they shall 
arriue into any our Dominions. And soe wee pray Almightie God 
to preserue and prosp yo u , and to make yo u victorious against 
yo r Enemies, ffrom our Royall Pallace at Westminster this 



[AMES by the grace of Almightie God kinge of greate 
Brittaine ffraunce and Ireland, defender of the 
Christian faith, To the highe & excellent Lordf the 
Goii r no rs of Bandris* Greetinge. The reporte wee haue 
heard from o r loueinge Subiectf , that haue traded into the East 
Indies both of yo r power and greatnes, and of yo r 
Bandri e s . G Princelie and favorable disposition to cherish and 

interteyne all sortes of Strangers that doe resorte 
into yo r Countries, hath encourradged the bearers hereof Peter 
Flores, Lucas Antheumes Rofct Browne and others, w th o r good 
approbacon and likeinge to vndertake a Voyadge thither, aswell 
to sollicitt yo r freindshipp and Amity w th vs, as to interchange 
such Comodities as may be most of vse to each others Countries, 
being Confident that yo u will be ready to ymbrace this o r desier, 
and not onlie to receaue our people w th yo r accustomed favo r to 
others, butt for their better encourradgm*, to afford them yo r 
Royall pteccon for the setlinge of their trade and comerce in 
those partes w th such Conditions of securitie and safetie as shall 
be most convenient for the aduancem* of the mutuall proffitt 
& vtility of each others Countries. Wee haue giuen in chardge 
to o r people to demeane themselues w th all respect^ of Courtesie 

1 A mistake for ' ' yo r . ' ' 

3 The position of this town or district is matter of conjecture only. It may 
possibly be Bandon, on the eastern coast of the Malay Peninsula, or, as Dr. Anderson 
suggests, Patris, in Queddah, on the western coast. 



426 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

and freindshipp towardf yo r people, not doubtinge butt that 
there pceedinge will proue as acceptable to yo u , as they haue 
beene to yo r neighbor kinges and Countries w th whome they 
haue traded to their good Contentm*, and that in conformyty 
thereof yo u will expreslie Comand yo r Gou r nors & Vassells to ayde 
& assist them in their needs and necessities as wee will be readie 
to doe the like to yo ra , yf happilie they shall arriue into any o r 
dominions. And soe wee pray Almightie God to preserue and 
psp yo u , and to make yo u victorious against yo r Enemies, ffrom 
o r Royall Pallace att Westminster this 




AMES 1 by the grace of Almightie God kinge of greete 
Brittaine ffraunce & Ireland defender of the Christian 
faith : To the highe & mightie Prince the greate 
kinge of lapan &c : Greetinge. 

The reporte wee heard from o r loueinge subiectf , that haue 
traded into the East Indies, both of yo r power 
and greatnes, and of yo r princelie and favorable 
dispotition to cherish and enterteyne all sortes of straungers, 
that doe resorte into yo r Countreys, hath incourradged the 
bearers hereof Peter Flores, Lucas Antheumes, Rofet Browne 
& others w th o r good approbation and likeinge to vndertake a 
voyadge thither ; aswell to solicitt yo r freindshipp and Amity w th 
vs, as to enterchange such Comodities, as may be of most vse to 
each others Countreys, beinge Confident, that yo u wilbe readie to 
ymbrace this o r desier, and not onlie to receaue o r people w th yo r 
accustomed favor to others, but for their better incourradgem*, to 
afford them yo r Royall proteccon for the setlinge of their trade 
and Comerce in those partes, w th such Conditions of securitie 
and safetie, as shall be most convenient for the aduancm* of the 
mutuall proffttt & vtility of each others Countreys. Wee haue 
giuen in chardge to o r people to demeane them selues w th all 
respectf of courtesie & freindshipp towardf yo r people, not 

1 See note, page 422. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 427 

doubtinge butt that their pceedinge will proue as acceptable to 
yo u , as heeretofore they haue beene to yo r neighbour kingf & 
Countreis w th whorne they haue traded to their good contenting 
and that in conformitie thereof, yo u will expreslie chardge and 
coinaunde yo r Gou r nors and vassalls to aide and assist them in 
their neede and necessities, as wee will be readie to doe the like 
to yo rs , yf happily they shall arriue into any o r domynions. And 
soe wee pray Almightie God to preserue & prosp yo u , and to 
make yo u victorious against yo r Enemies, ffrom o r Royall 
Pallace att Westin this 




A discourse delyuered to M r Gouern r , 
by Peter Floris & Lucas Antheumes of ther p r tended voiage. 1 

|ETTING sayle from hence in Nouemfcr 1610, we hope 
to arryue at Mesolopatane^ and Port Polmone 3 vppo y e 
Coast of Coroniandell in luly or August, or at the 
longest in Septemfer. 1611. And ther to employe our 
Capitall in dyu r s sortf of Gotten linnen, to wete, one third part 
for y e Island of laua and Banta, the oth r two 
Giohi s s c vo1age f f third part? for Patane, and Siam. The said 
Bengaia? th capitall being employed as aforesaid, we purpose 

to set saile fro the Coast of Coromandell in 
lanuarye 1612 towardf Banta, (the monsone seruing o r turne) so 
as we may be at Banta in March) and ther employe o r foresaid 
third pt of o r capitall, eith r in Rialls of 8, Gould, China ware, 
Sandalu, or otherwise as the time shall affourd, for then wilbe the 
time for y e China lunckes to be ther. And after that we shall 
haue pfourmed o r trade ther, we purpose to set sayle the last of 
May, or beginning of lune, in the foresaid yeare toward Pahan, 
Patane, and Siam, and ther along the Coast, employe o r oth r two 
third ptf of o r Capitall in China ware, Beniamyn, Lignu Aloes, 

1 See page 363, note. 2 See page 73, note 10. 

3 This may possibly be the copyist's corruption of "Pulicat," which was the first 
port the ship visited on the coast of Coromandel. 



4 z8 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Calumback , l Muske, Gum Lac, and oth r druggf , w ch we may come 
by. And if we should not sell all o r comodityes, by the moneth of 
Nouembr, then we purpose to settle a factorye in Patane or Sia, 
w th the rest of the good^, ther to trade w th the China lunckes, 
in March next following, and the shippe w th the rest of the 
aduaunced Capitall, shall in the moneth of Nouembr, take her 
voyage, thorough the Straictf of Sincapura, by Malacca, and so 
againe toward^ the Coast of Coromandell, and ther wyll sell o r 
Comodityes, as gould, mony, and oth 1 ' thinges, for Cotto lynnen 
whight and paynted, both to trade againe w th all, at Patans and 
Siam, as also to bring homeward^ for England; as also a good 
pcell of Cotto yarne. And then in the moneth of May A 1613, 
we meane to set sayle againe from y e Coastf of Coromandell, to 
the Straictf of Sincapura, and so againe to Patane and Syam, and 
ther traffique vntill the moneth of Nouembr, and then take o r 
course towardf Banta; and from thence in December 1613, or in 
lanuarye 1614, take o r course toward^ England, wher we hope to 
arryue in August 1614. hauing laden into o r shippe so much 
China silke, Taffataes, Damaskes, and Pursalyne, as we may 
attayne vnto, or as o r Capitall will pmytte, and we thinke may be 
here vented in England, Also a good pcell of Beniamyn, a pcell 
of Lignu Aloes, a lyttle Calumback, Muske fro Syam, Gum Lack, 
Also 150 bales of Cotto lynnen, whight and paynted, the w ch will 
serue to vent in Europe, but espiallye for the Coast otBarbarye, and 
some for the Coast of Ginnye, Angola, and oth r placf, and about 
200 bales of Cotto yarne ; and for a proofe a pcell of Indico fro 
the coast of Coromandell, and some other drugges and wares, the 
w ch we may light vppo, and as o r capitall shall pmitte vs to deale 
in ; This is o r p r sent resolucon for y e p r tended voyage, yet 
forasmuch as all thingf are mutable, so must we rule and gou r ne 
ourselues (being in those pt) as y e time, & occasio shall pmitte. 2 



1 Calambac is the finer sort of Lignum Aloes or " Eagle- wood " (Aquilaria Agallocha}. 

3 For an interesting account of this voyage, shewing how far Floris and Antheumis 
succeeded in carrying out their plans, the reader may be referred to Dr. Anderson's 
Early English Intercourse with Siam (1890). 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 429 

To ihe right hon l y e Earle of Salisbuirye 

Lord high Threr of England 

The humble peticon of y e M r chants of London, trading 
the East Indyes. 1 

IHEWETH, 

That yo r supp^, hauing long and patientlye endured, 
sundry notorious wrongs & iniuryous Courses at the 
handf of the Hollanders (in ther trade to the East 
Indyes) are enforced at last to breake sylence, and complayne their 
greifes ; That the Hollanders hauing gotte into 

Peticon to my Lo. , ._, r,i i -r i r 

Threr compiayning ther possessio, dyuers of the cheif plac of 

y e wrongs sustayncd . . f .. . . 

in y E. indyes by y tramque in those ptf, and forciblye appropriating 

Hollanders. 1,1 r i i i i ?- 

some, w cjl do 01 right belong vnto the hnghsh, 
to trade ther before any oth r Natio whatsoeu 1 ', next vnto the 
Portugall, do seeke wholye to debarre yo r said supp^, from the 
said trade, or to drawe sundrye inconueniencf vppo them, 
no way hon' )le nor pfitable for this Land, ffor S r ffrancys Drake, 
(vppo a contract w th the king of Teronata, for the trade of the 
Cloues in y* Island, and the rest of the Island^ vnder his dominio) 
assisted him in his warres, against the king of Tedore, and con- 
firm 'd that agrem*, by delyu r ing him a Ring, 3 w th a faire Emerald 
stone in y e same, (as is well knowne to Yo r Lo pp .). M r Cauendishe 
afterwardf folowing him, had y e like promise at Balemboa, in the 
south pt of the Island of laua, wher he refreshed, conferd w th the 
king or cheif in that place, and had promise of all the pepp ther. 
Vppo w ch assurauncf, the m r chantf of Londo, and others, sett 
out two shippes in trade for that place, vnder the comaund of 
Cap ne Rayman and Cap ne Lancaster; In w ch accon Rayman was 
cast away about the Cape Bonce spei, and Lancaster pfourm'd his 
voyage, beating along the Coast of India, vntill he came to 
Sumatra,'v/heT his men falling sicke, and victualls scanting, durst 
not aduenture for y e Moluccaes, but retournd w th his lading of 
pepp, and was wrackt in the West Indyes. 3 

After them folowed the Hollanders w th English pylottf, who 
pfourming a succesfull voiage to Bantu haue euer since psecuted 
a most ample trade. And p r sentlye vppo ther retourne, yo r 

1 There is a copy of this petition at the Record Office, endorsed with the date 
" November, 1611 " (see Cal. of State Papers, E. Indies, 1513-1616, page 231). 

2 Cp. page 68. * See Voyages of Sir James Lancaster (Hakluyt Society). 



43 o 2-TltSr LETTER BOOK OF 

supp l e as well to weaken the Spanyavd, (then the comon enemye) 
as otherwise, ioyned in a Comp ie , and man'd forth, 4 of the best 
m r chant shippes of the kingdome, the Dragon, Hector, Susan and 
Ascention, w ch went to Sumatra and laua, and rinding peacable 
trade, setled a factorye at Banta, wher ther men being weake, the 
Cap nes thought fitt not to attempt the Moluccaes, (the Monsoune 
being then past) but hauing fought w th the Enemye in the 
Straict^ of Sincapura, and take a Carrycke, they laded ther shippes 
w th spice, and retournd well home, all full laden, (the Hollander 
then being very glad of yo r supp^ companye.) At the retourne 
of w ch shippes, yo r supp*e furnisht them forth againe, (vnder the 
comaund of S r Henry Middleto Generall) who according to his 
Comission, attempted the Moluccaes, and comyng theth r , saued the 
king of Teranataes life, w th 6 Hollanders, w dl were in daung r and 
had bene taken by the king of Tedore, w th 80 men more, and cut 
in peecf , (if he had not bene) as the rest of ther companye were, 
for which fauo r both the king and Hollanders, promised to lade 
ther shippe w th Cloues, and to do them any other kindnes that 
possiblye they could. But vpp5 newes of the comyng of certaine 
Holland shippes, they neith r .pmitted them trade, according to 
promise, nor to staie ther, but were absolutelye banisht the Island 
by the Hollanders meanes, (as the king himself tould y e English 
the Hollander threatning, that if he did not, they would ioyne w th 
the king of Tedore his enemye, to driue him out of his Countrye.) 
5 r Henry thervpp5 was enforced to pcure his whole lading from 
the Portugall, who vsed him very kindly & respectiuelye, giuing 
him all the Cloues they had at reasonable prices ; And resigned 
vpp vnto him, a Towne, called Taffasole, w th a ffort, to the king 
of Englands vse (by y e consent of the king of Tedore right owner 
therof) w ch now the Hollanders kepe, (hauing fortifyed the same) 
besides many oth r place in the Countrye ; appropriating to 
themselues the whole trade of the Island? ; keping Men of warre 
vppo the Coast, and phibyting all oth r Nations (as farre as in 
them lyeth) from any trade ther (maintayning now for Lawe, by 
strong hand, that w ch latelye they estemed vnreasonable : for the 
Portugall to challenge a more spiall ppertie in any of those ptf , 
then themselues or any oth r Nation whatsoeu r .) And from thence 
haue pceded to the Island^ of Banda, (the place wher Nutmege 
and Mace do growe,) wher at ther comyng \v fl1 14 sayle of 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 431 

shippes, they found yo r supp'f shippe the Hector trading ther, 
(wherin was Cap ne W m Keeling,) hailing a house and factorye on 
shore, and many debtf in the Island?) whome they vsed most 
vnkindlye, searching his boate disgracefullye both going for fresh 
water and retourning, and not suffering him to haue any furth r 
trade, nor to gather in his debtf but w th a pemptory comaund, 
to be gone, wherunto (thorough necessitye) he submytting 
himself, was enforced to de.pt, w th out his lading, or any furth r 
trade. 

Since that tyme, Cap ne Dauyd Middleto in the Expedico, seking 
trade at Banda, and vsing his best endeuo rs , both by guiftf, psua- 
sions, and Comodityes, could not be pmitted by them for any 
comerce, eith r w th themselues, or the Island", but w th many reproch- 
full, insolent speches, was forciblye put from all trading in those 
ptC, but what he gott w th strong hand against ther wylles, from oth r 
broken Islandf neare adioyning, w th extreame hazard and daung r , 
(they deuising and oftentimes attempting, to surprize consume 
by fire, and cut off by any indirect meanes, both shippe, Men, 
and goodf .) 

To coulo r all w ch ther doingf, they do most slaunderouslye 
report, That yo r supp^ haue furnisht the Spanyard (as the comon 
enemye,) w th great store of Ordinance, and a great quantitye 
of powder, besides oth r implem*^ of warre, And would haue 
compeld a Portugall, (whome they tooke), to haue iustifyed, That 
S r Hen : Middleio delyu r ed y e Portugalls 40 bar of powder, and 4 
whole Culueringf, w th the lending of two of his cheif gunners 
to do them seruice against the Hollanders ; w ch by the Portugall 
was more conscionablye refusd, then 1 by them vrg'd, and 
submytted himself rath r to haue vndergone death, then father 
such a vntruth upp5 yo r supp^. 

All w dl vncyuell and inhumaine wrongf abroad against yo r 
, are done by Comission from the m r ch f f and Owners, at 

apne woifard home, (as they cannott denye and oth rs haue 
acknowledgd, and hath bene latelye confessed 



by some of them*) wherby yo r supp* hauing the Spanyard^ and 

1 Than. 

2 These three words are underlined, no doubt with reference to the note in the 
margin. 



432 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Holland" enemyes in the Indyes, must of necessitye be enforced 
to giue ou r ther trade ther, (w ch is the cheif end the Hollander 
aymeth at). 

Yo r supp'e therfore forced by these extremityes, & 
knowing ther greifes, but hauing no meanes of remedye, 
do humblye implore yo r Lo. hon ble assistaunce & mediatio 
to the States for redresse in these iniuryous courses, and 
that a reciprocall kindnes may be receyued from ther men, 
that as yo r supp*f are tyed by a bond of duitye to 
submytte themselues by comaund, not to be offensiue 
to any whatsoeu r ; so they might not be iniuriouslye 
rewarded, but enioye the benefitte and fredome of trade, 
wher the p r rogatiue rather apptaynes to the then any 
oth r . And yo r supp'f shall (as they haue bene alwayes 
bound) praie for yo r Lo. encrease in all hono r and true 
happynes. 



OST worthie S". Vppo some speeches had at my 
being at Amsterdam, in opening the wrong?, w ch I 
conceyued the East India Comp ie of London had 
sustayned by yo r people, in those pt?, I found yo r 
inclynatio and readynes to ioyne in conference by some Comis- 
MrRo: Middleton i to sioners to be noiated for eith r pt. Wheruppo at 
my retoume, into England, I acquainted o r 
Gouern r , Depuitye and Comyttees w th that motio. 
But before my comyng, they had exhibyted a peticon to my Lo. 
Threr, 2 to acquaint the State w th ther wrong?, and to craue 
redresse for the same. Notw th standing vppo my relacon, I found 
them wylling to staie any furth r pceding, as yet, but to ioyne in 
any good course, to haue all wrong? righted, and all iust cause of 
offence remou'd betwixt the and y u . That as o r Nations haue 

1 Robert Middleton, who seems to have been related in some way to Sir Henry 
Middleton, was a prominent and active member of the Company from its formation, 
and was a " committee " for a long period. He was one of the commissioners sent to 
Holland in 1615 (see note, page 434). 

a See the preceding document. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 433 

long contynued, in firme bondf and league of amytye, so we 
might peacablye pcede to trade ioynctlye togeth r (w tb out troubling 
of eith r States (to right conceyued iniuryes) or giuing such an 
aduauntage to others (who would willinglye take the opportuntye 
of fishing in the troubled streames of o r diuision and dissencons). 
So that (vppon conference) they are wylling to ioyne Comission r s, 
w th such as y u shall substitute here, to salue and put a remedie to 
all greifes past, and consid 1 ' of some indifferent course to be 
contynued betwixt vs heraft r , for the good and benefitte of eith r 
pt. Wherin I could not retourne a more spedie resolucon, 
because of some extraordinarye occasions of launching certaine 
shippes, and oth r buysines of great import, w ch then hindred them ; 
but haue now w th the first opportunitye, acquainted y u therw th , 
that if y u shall determyne of psecuting the form r pposicon, and 
appoint some Comission r s fro y u , it might be done spedilye (for 
the good I hope of both the Nations) and that I might receiue yo r 
resolucons herin, w th all expedicon. And so reconiending the care 
herof to yo r graue consideracons, and the successe to godf 
puidence, whome we beseech to direct all o r pcedingf to his 
glorie, (my self being diuoted in all true affeccon to do all 
acceptable omcf I may for the good of both) I take my leaue, 
and rest, 

Yo rs to be comaunded 
Directed To the right Wo r11 , my 
most respected friendf, Burgom r 
Oatgens, Burgom r Pavij, Skepen 
Hasselare, Skepen lacop gerson 
heind, Pentionalis Pavij, Dericke 
van Os, and lohn van Harell, at 
Amsterda, hast yes. 

London, 5 Octob : 1611. 

ffor aunswer of w ch Ire, an ord r of Court was retournd 
from thence, w ch is recorded in the Court booke. 1 pag. 271. 



Now lost, as already mentioned. 

I G 




434 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Laus deo. 20 Deccb : 1611. In Amsterdam. 

loUING friend M r Middleto &c. About 2 daies since, I 
had some speech w th Burgom 1 ' Pavij about the E.India 
matt"; and he wylled me to certifye yo u , that they 
were not vnmyndfull of that matt r , y u wrote to the 
about, though as yet by reason of oth r buysines, nothing effected. 
Yet ther were certaine appointed, (wherof he was 

Mr Pasfylcl to Mr Ro '. 

Middieron about the one) to moue the States about it, because they 

same buysines. ,,-, 

could do nothing therm w th out ther aduise and 
consent : and said moreou r that they were to go w th in 8 or 10 
daies to the Hagh about it : and that they had giuen exp r sse 
charge to the shippes, y* are gone out, y* they should carye them- 
selues, in all friendlye manner y* was possible, toward C the 
English in the Indies, w th out offring them the least iniurye that 
might be ; And y* he doubted not, but ere long, ther should so 
good order be taken, that both Nations should contynue good 
friendf . Thus much he wylled me to certifye y u . And so not 
hauing else at instant to enlardge &c. 

Yo r louing friend Samuell Pasfyld. 1 



EE 2 that are my most laudable, fortunate, welthye and 
great Vizroies and Beglerbyes, 3 y* are on the way fro 
my most happie and Imperiall Throne, (both by sea 
and land) vntill the confynes and lymittf of the East 

1 This well-meant attempt at conciliation seems to have met with scant success. 
After some delay, the Dutch Company appointed commissioners to treat of the 
subjects in dispute, who reached London in the spring of 1613. A month was spent 
in negotiations, but without result. The delegates returned to Holland, and the 
matter was left to be decided by a future treaty. In 1615, English Commissioners, 
including Middleton and Abbot as representatives of the Company, proceeded to the 
Hague, but their efforts to effect a satisfactory settlement proved equally fruitless. 

2 This " Pass," was carried out by Capt. Saris, and stood him in good stead in 
his efforts to obtain trade in the Red Sea. Purchas prints a slightly different version 
(Lib. IIII., ch. i), giving also a drawing of the "scale." The principal variations are 
noted below. 

3 " Bey [' lord '] in y e Turkish language signifieth knight with vs. Begliarbei 
" [' lord of lords '] signifieth lord Admirall. Sangiaccho [' banner '] is that person \v th 
" the Turkes, that gouerneth a prouince or countrey." (Notes to the account of the 
taking of Famagusta, in Hakluyt, Vol. V.) 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 435 

Indyes ; Owners of some part of dignitye, and those vnto whome 
of y belongeth to giue ayd, helpe and succo r in gode 



Sftef'to^lS cause and Musulmanicall religion, vppo their 
Empero beck: the wealth and greatnes of 
whome, let it contynue for euer. Likewise vnto y u my most 
laudable and valiant Sangrack-beys, 1 (that are vnder the aboue- 
nam'd Beglerbeys) Owners, and hope, of future great r dignityes ; 
and those vnto whome belongeth duityfull ayd and helpe in godf 
cause and religion, vppo their Empero rs aduise, the hono r and 
dignitye of whome, be eu r contynuing. And vnto yee my most 
laudable, wise and prudent Justice of peace, and ludgf, 2 (that are 
in the p r scincte of the said Sangrack-beyes) whose Judgment^, 
iustice, & wordf do flowe, as from a myne 3 of all wisdome and 
prudence ; the worthines and greatnes of whose dignitye and 
functio, let it contynue for euer. Also to y u my laudable, great 
and most worthie Cap nes , and Reyses* of all o r Nauyes, and 
shipping^, that swyme on the face of the sea. Vnto yee my 
laudable Cap ncs of the Castles, Cityes and Townes ; And vnto y u 
worthie and laudable Customers, dwelling vppo the Sea? Ryuers, 
Bridges, and all oth r ptf of o r Domynions ther adiacent, Vppo 
the sight of this my most high and Imperiall comaundm*, in 
conformitye of yo r most bounden duityes, yee shall arise and do 
obeysaunce therunto. 

And herby yee shall vnderstand that the English Embassad r , 
that here resydeth, in o r happye and most high Port, hath giue vs 
to vnderstand, by his supplicatio, That forasmuch, as some of 
his Ma tle the King of England his subiectf, haue w th great charge 
and labo r , found out a Trade in the East Indyes ; and hearing of 
the fame, and wealth 6 of some partf of our Countrye, in their 
passage to the Indyes, are desirous to visite those placf , for y e 
enlarging of the said Trade ; and 7 that such men in so good and 
profitable 8 an enterprize, hauing deserued 9 all fauo r ayd and 

1 " Saniacq-beys " in Purchas. (See previous note.) 

2 Purchas adds "and Ministers of Justice." 4 Rais, a naval " commandant." 

3 Fountaine (Purchas). Sea coast (Purchas). 

6 Purchas's version runs: "and withall vnderstand of Wealth & likelihood of 
Trade." 

7 To the end (Purchas). 

8 Laudable (Purchas). 9 In so good and laudable enterprizes haue (Purchas). 

I G I 



43 6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

helpe, so farre as may be lawfullye and con lie men t lye yeilded, 
hath requested vs in the name of his Ma 1 " the King of England, to 
vouchsaufe them o r . saufe conduct & comendacons. In con- 
formitye of whose request, as also in regard wee and o r 
p r decesso rs , are and haue bene for the space of many yeares, in 
strict league and amitye, w th the meconed King of England and 
the Subiectf of that Kingdome, that haue long had, and now haue 
free traffique and trade in merchandizing in o r dominions and 
Countryes, thorough the Mediterranean seas. Wee do comaund 
and exp r slye charge y u all, and eu r ye one of y u our abouenamed 
subiectf & officers, that y u will not onlye kindlye and louinglye 
entertayne and receyue the said merchant^ subiectf of England, 
comyng or passing through, or by any of o r Dominions, espiallye 
intending to trade to the Dominions of Yemen, Aden, and Mochon, 
and the pt adioyning therunto ; assisting and releyuing them w th 
all thingf nedefull for themselues, their men and their Shippes, 
but also freelye to pmitte them, by land or by Sea, to go or sayle, 
to go forward or retourne, euen as their occasion shall require, to 
remaine in any of o r Dominions, Countryes or Cityes, graunting 
them such libertye of Trafficke and priuiledgC , as shalbe reason- 
able, w th out giuing, or suff r ing any let or hinderaunce, iniurye or 
molestacon to be offered or done vnto the ; yea, y 11 shall yeild vnto 
the, such officf of beneuolence and humanitye, as shalbe meete 
and conuenyent to be yeilded vnto honest men, and straung, 
vndertaking so long and laboryous a io r nye. And if it be so, that 
wee shall vnderstand that contrarye to the Capitulacon the 
Amitye and the League w ch is betwene vs and the King of 
England, y u do offer them the least wrong, and any way molest 
and trouble the said m r chantf in their traffique, or ought els, 
Knowe yee for certaine that y u shall not onlye incurre our high 
displeasure, but y 11 shalbe punished for example vnto oth rs : And 
therfore in conformitye of this my espiall Imperiall comaundm*, 
y u shall gouerne yo r selues, and gyue creditte to this my Imperiall 
insigne. Wrytten at o r mansion guard Constantinople, on the 
fiuetenth day of the Moone, Zilkigie 



i.e. i8th February, 1610/11. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 437 

| AMES 1 by the grace of God king of England Scotland 
ffraunce and Ireland, Defender of the Faith &c 
To our trustie and welbeloved Subiectf Thomas 
Best 3 and Thomas Aid worth 3 greeting, Whereas 
diuerse of our loving subiectf , by the name of the Gouernor and 
HisMatiesComission company of Merchante of London, trading into 
to cap"* Best. ^ as i n dj eS} at theire owne aduentures Cost? 

and chardges for the honor of this our realme of England, and 
for the increase and advancement of trade and merchandize w th in 
the same haue sett foorth sundry voyages to the East Indies, and 
allreadie discou r ed and begun to settle a trade into those partf , 
and intending the continewing thereof, aswell by frequenting 
those places allready setled as by further discou r y of other ptes, 
w ch may be fitt for the enterchanging, of the Coinodities of our 
kingdomes w th the Commodities of those places, such as may bee 
of speciall vse and benefitt, to vs and our Subiectf , having to this 
purpose nowe prepared and sett foorth thone called the Dragon 
and the other the Hosiander to the said East Indies, and the 
places adioyning therevnto, And whereas our said Subiectf the 
aduenturers of those voyages, haue chosen our trusty and wel- 

1 The Royal Commission for the Tenth Voyage (1612-14), consisting of two ships, 
the Dragon and the Hosiander, under the command of Thomas Best. There is a 
docquet of this commission at the Public Record Office, under date 30th December, 
1611. 

2 Thomas Best was a seaman of considerable experience, though he had not been 
previously in the service of the Company. In this Tenth Voyage he particularly 
distinguished himself by defeating a superior force of Portuguese war vessels, which 
attacked him off Surat, a victory which made a great impression on the natives, and 
procured a firman which was practically the foundation of English trade in Western 
India. On his return in 1614, he was well received by the Company ; and for several 
years his name was brought forward from time to time as that of a fit person to 
command further expeditions. In November, 1617, all arrangements had been made 
for his taking command of the fleet then preparing for the Indies, but a quarrel 
occurred, and Best was dismissed the Company's service. He contrived to make his 
peace with them, but was not again employed. In 1623, he was in command of a 
vessel in the Royal Navy, and for the rest of his life was an active servant of the 
Crown (see Diet. Nat. Biography). He is supposed to have died about 1638. 

3 Thomas Aldworth appears to have been a man of some standing before his 
entry into the Company's service, and was at one time sheriff of Bristol. He was 
left at Surat as head of the factory there, and held that post until his death in the 
autumn of 1615. 



438 P'IKST LETTER BOOK OF 

beloved subiect Thomas Best to be the Captaine and cheife 
Comaunder of all the Merchant? Marriners, and other Subiect? 
w cii are or s halbe shipped in the said Twoe shipp? Wee gratiously 
favouring theire intended voyage and approving and allowing of 
theire choise of yo u to the same imployment being willing to 
furnish yo n with all fitt and convenient power, and aucthority to 
rule and governe all and every our Subiect? imployed in this 
voyadge, by a due obedience to be by them yeilded vnto yo u in 
the observing and executing, of all such good orders and consti- 
tucons as yo u shall thinke convenyent to ordeine and make, for 
the furtherance of the said voyage according to such pticuler 
direccons and enstruccons as yo u shall receiue from the Gouernor 
and companie of merchant? the aduenturers in this voyage, w ch 
direccons & instruccons. Our intencon is, and soe wee doe hereby 
will and comaund. that you doe punctually observe in eu r y 
pticuler, straightly chardging and comaunding, all and euery 
person or ^sons imployed in this voyadge and shipped in the said 
Twoe Shipps, to giue all due obedience, and respect vnto yo n , 
during the said voyadge, and to beare themselues one toward? 
another, in good order and quietnes, for avoyding any occacon 
that might bread Mutiny, quarrell or dissensions amongest them, 
to the hinderaunce of the good successe w ch is to be hoped for by 
God? providence of this said voyage. And in Default of such 
duty and obedience to be pformed toward? yo u , for the correcting 
and quenching of all such Mutinyes quarrell? or Dissencons that 
maie arise by the euill disposicon of any pson whatsoeuer Wee 
do hereby aucthorize the said Thomas Best, During the said 
voyage, or during soe longe time as yo u shall Hue in the said 
voyage, to chaistice correct and punish all offendo and tran- 
gresso 1 ' 8 in that behalfe according to the quallitie, of theire 
offences, w th such punishment? as are comonly vsed in all Armyes 
at Sea, when they are not Cappitall, And for Cappitall offences, 
as Wilfull murther w ch is hatefull in the sight of God, or Mutiny, 
w ch is an offence w ch maie tend to the overthrowe of the said 
voyage, the same being duely iustly approved against any of the 
pson or psons aforesaid, wee doe hereby giue vnto you the said 
Thomas Best, during all the time of the said voyadge, or during 
soe long time as yo u shall Hue in the said voyadge, full power and 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 439 

aucthority, to vse and put in execucon, our Lawe, called Lawe 
Martiall in that behalfe. And theis our Lres, shall be your 
sufficient warrant & dischardge for the dooinge and executing of 
all and singuler the premisses, And forasmuch as at this present 
time, wee are in amytie, w th all Christian princes, and are 
vnwilling that any of our Subiectf , should giue occacon of breach 
or hinderance thereof towardf any our our Confederates, frindf 
or Allyes. And because wee are not ignorant, of the emulacon 
and envie. w ch doth accompany the discouery of Countries and 
trades, And of the quarrellf and contencons, w ch doe many times 
fall out, betweene the subiectf of diuerse Princes when they 
meete the one w th the other, in forraigne and farr remote Coun- 
tryes, in prosecuting the course of their Discoveries, And being 
desirous that our subiectf should forbeare to move or beginn any 
quarrellf or contencon vpon the subiectf of our Confederates 
frindf or Allies either in theire gooing foorth or retorning from 
any of theire voyages, Wee therefore doe hereby straightly charge 
and comaund yo 11 the said Thomas Best, and all other vnder your 
Comaund, That neither in your voyadge outwardf or homeward f , 
or in any Country Island Port or Place, where yo u shall abide or 
come, during the time of your being abrade, out of our king- 
domes or dominions where yo u meete w th any the subiectf, of 
the king of Spaine or of any other our confederates frindes or 
Allies, or of any other nacon or people, their Shippf vessellf 
goodes or merchandizes yo u doe not attempt or goe about, to sett 
vpon take or surprise, theire gsons Shippes vessellf goodes or 
merchandizes, or offer any iniury or discourtesie vnto them, as 
yo u will answere the contrary at your vttermost pillf. Except 
you shalbe by them first therevnto iustly provoked or driven 
either in the iust defence of your owne persons, shippes vessellf 
goodes or merchandizes by any there disturbance or hinderance, 
whatsoever in your quiet course of Trade or for recompence and 
recovery of the psons shippes goodes or merchandizes, of any our 
Subiectf that are allready in or neere the East Indies or for any 
other iust cause of your defence. In w ch cases soe excepted yf 
yo u attepte surprize and take the persons Shippf or goodf of any 
Prince or State by whose Subiectf you shall susteine any wrong 
or losse in manner as aforesaid you shall not for any such act or 



44 o FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

actf grounded vpon the occacons aboue menconed, be in danger 
or subiect to the pill and penalties of our lawes, allwayes p r sup- 
posing, and soe requiring yo 11 to vse, all possible endeavo, by all 
meanes whatsoever to suffer noe spoyle to be made of any goodes 
or merchandizes, nor imbezilling any thing whatsoever, that 
shalbe recou r ed by you, but to see them safely brought home, w th 
the Billf of lading and charter pties to the intent that there maie 
be restitucon made by us, soe soone as yo u shall receiue satis- 
faccon from that State or people by whome yo u are dampnified, 
of what Nacon soever, And forasmuch as our said Subiectf , the 
merchant? and others the aduenturers of this voyadge out of 
prejudice 1 and forsight of any Mortallity or otherwise (w ch God 
forbidd) should befall vnto our Subiect Thomas Best, haue made 
choise of our Trustie and loving Subiect Thomas Aldworth; to 
succeede the said Thomas Best, in the chardge and Comaund of 
Captaine and cheife Comaunder, of all the psons imployed in this 
voyadge as aforesaid, wee doe alsoe in case such an accident 
should happen, allowe and approve of theire choise in that behalfe, 
And doe hereby giue full power and aucthoritie to you the said 
Thomas Aldworth, to doe and execute . all and every thing incident 
to the chardge of Captaine and cheife Comaunder of all the psons 
employed, as is before coinitted and imposed vppon the said 
Thomas Best; And theis our Lres shalbe, shalbe allsoe sufficient 
warrant and dischardg to the said Thomas A Idworth for the dooing 
and executing of all and singuler the premiss 3 as aforesaid. In 
witnes whereof wee haue caused theis our Lres to be made Pattentf . 
Witnes our selfe at Westm r the Sixt day of January in the Ninthe 
yeere of our Raigne of England ffrauce and Ireland and of 
Scotland the ffiue and ffortith. 2 

p bre de private Sigillo 

Coppin. 



1 A mistake for " providence " (see previous commissions). 
3 6th January, 1611/12. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 441 

[AMES 1 by the grace of God king of England, Scotland 
ffrauce and Ireland Defender of the faith &c To our 
trustie and welbeloved Subiect Thomas Best sendeth 
greeting signifying vnto all people, that whereas 
Certaine ShippC of our kingdome of England, at the Aduenture of 
the Gouernor and company of East India merchant^, are to take 
theire voyadge to diuerse partf and portf of the East Indies 
especially to such as are in the kingdome of Cainbaia or in any 
other pt of the greate Kinge of the Magolles Dominion, there to 
mannage a trade and peaceable comerce : w th the subiectf of the 
king, wee doe by vertue and aucthority, of theis our present Lres 
giue and graunt vnto our said Loving Subiectf Thomas Best full 
power & Aucthoritie aswell to entertaine and prosecute, the said 
Trade and Comerce, as alsoe in our name and in the behalfe of 
our pson, to treate of conclude and ratifie, w th the said greate 
king of the Magollf or any his Deputies, to that purpose sent and 
lawfully aucthorized a firme and inviolable peace w ch (the Con- 
dicons by our said Loving subiect^ vnto them pposed being duly 
by them kept and observed) shall alsoe remaine on the part of 
our loving subiectf w tll out breach. 

And if any son or psons whatsoever, shall in contempt of vs 
our Royall Crowne and Dignity p r sume to attempt the Contrary 
to theis present Articles concluded, They shalbe assured to 
incurr our heavie displeasure and wrathfull Indignacon, w th all 
greevous and severe punishment : in bodies, Hues, and goodf, 
Witnes our greate Seale of England to the originall annexed. 



1 A special authorisation to Captain Best to negotiate, on the king's behalf, a 
treaty with the Great Mogul. 



442 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 




| AMES by the grace of God king of England Scotland 
ffrance and Irland Defend 1 " of the faith &c To our 
trustie and welbeloued Subiectf Captaine Christopher 
Newport 1 and Joseph Saulbanke'* Greeting, Whereas 
Diuerse of our loving subiectf, by the name of Gouern r and 
His Mati< comis- Company of Merchant^ of London, trading into 
port t0 v C p a pon N t e h v e" the East Indies, at theire owne aduentures costf 
Wfth voiage. and c h a rges for the honour of this our Realme of 

England, and for the increase and aduancement of Trade and 
merchandize w th in the same, have sett forth sundry voyages to 
the East Indies, and allready discou r ed and begunn to settle a 
trade into those partf, and intending the contynewing thereof 
aswell by frequenting those places, allready setled, as by further 
discou r yes of other t w ch maie be fitt for the interchangeing of 
the Comodities of those places such as may be of spetiall vse and 
benefitt to vs and our Subiectf ; having to this purpose, nowe 
prepared and sett forth the good shipp called the Expedicbn of 
nigh Three hundred tuns. And whereas, our said subiectf the 
aduenturers of those voyages, have chosen, you our said subiect 
Captaine Christofer Newport, to be the principall Comaunder of 
Merchant^ Marriners, and other our subiect , w dl are or shalbe 
shipped in the said shipp Wee gratiously favouring theire 
intended voyage, and approving and allowing, of theire choise of 
you to the same Comaund, being willing to furnish you w th all fitt 
and convenyent power and aucthoritie to rule and governe all and 
eu r y our Subiectf employed in this voyage, aswell such as belong 
to the said shipp, as all others that are ffollowers of the Persian 
Ambassador,* whome wee haue directed to be transported by you 

1 Captain Newport had already made several voyages to Virginia, and was well 
known as an experienced navigator, when he was chosen by the East India Company 
to command the Expedition in the Twelfth Voyage (1612-14). Upon his return, he was 
nominated general of the fleet for the following year, but Keeling was subsequently 
preferred to that post, with Newport as his vice-admiral in the Lion. This was his 
last voyage, for he died at Bantam in August, 1618. 

2 See note, page 235. 

3 Sir Robert Sherley, the youngest of the three celebrated brothers of that name, 
accompanied his brother Anthony to Persia in 1599, and in 1608 was sent by Shah Abbas 
on a mission to various European Powers, England among the rest. He was presented 
to King James at Hampton Court in 1611, and received the honour of knighthood. He 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 443 

vnto the Port of Surat) by a due obedyence to be by them yeilded 
vnto yo u , in the observing and executing of all such good orders 
and constitucons as you shall thinke convenyent to ordeine and 
make, for the furtherance of the said voyage, according to such 
pticuler direccons and enstruccons as yo u shall receiue from the 
said Gouern r . and Companye of Merchant^ the aduenturers in 
this voyadge, w ch direccons our intencon is, and soe we doe will 
and require you, that you doe punctually observe in all thingf , 
Straightly chargeing and comaunding, all and eu r y person or 
psons, imployed in this voyage, and shipped in the said shippe to 
giue all due obedyence, and respect vnto yo u during the said 
voyage, and to beare themselues one towardf another in good 
order and quietnes, for avoyding any occacon that might bread 
Mutiny quarrell^ or dissencon amongest them, to the hinderance 
of the good successe w ch is to be hoped for by godf providence, 
of this said voyadge, And in defallt of such Duty and obedience 
to be pforrned toward^ you for the correcting and quenching of all 
such mutynies quarrellf or dissentions, that maie arise by the 
evill and disorderly disposicon, of any pson whatsoeuer, wee do 
hereby aucthorise, the said Captaine Christopher Newport during 
the said voyadge, or during soe long time as you shall Hue in the 
said voyage to chastice correct and punish all offendo rs and 
transgresso 1 ' 8 , in that behalfe, according to the quallity of theire 
offences, w th such punishment^ as are comonly vsed in all armyes 
at Sea, when they are not cappitall, And for Cappitall offences, 
as wilfull murther w ch is hatefull in the sight of God, or Mutiny w ch 
is an offence w dl may tend to the overthrowe of the said voyage 
the same being duly and iustly approved, against any of the pson 
or psons aforesaid, we doe hereby giue vnto our said subiect 
Captaine Christofer Newport, during all the time of the said 
voyadge, or during soe longe time as yo 11 shall Liue, in the said 
voyadge, full power and aucthority to vse and put in execucon our 

was now (1612) returning to Persia. He came again to England in a similar capacity 
in 1623, but suffered some disgrace through the unexpected appearance of a native 
ambassador, who roundly declared Sir Robert's credentials to be forged. King 
James sent them both back to Persia, together with Sir Dodmore Cotton, accredited 
as English ambassador to the Shah. Sir Robert reached in safety the country of 
his adoption, but was badly received by his master, and died soon after in disgrace. 



444 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Lawe called lawe Martiall in that behalfe, And theis our Lres 
shalbe your sufficient warrant and dischardge for the dooing and 
executing of all and singuler the premiss 9 , And forasmuch as at 
this present time, wee are in amytie w th all Christian Princes, 
And are vnwilling that any of our subiectf , should giue occacon 
of breach or hinderance thereof, towardf any our confederates 
frindf or allyes, And because wee are not ignorant of the 
Emulacon and envy w ch doth accompany the discouery of 
Countryes, and Trades and of the quarrellf and contencons 
w ch do many tymes fall out, betweene the Subiectf of diuerse 
Princes, when they meete the one w th the other in forraigne are 1 
farr remote Countryes in psecuting the course of theire dis- 
coveryes, and being desirous that our Subiectf should forbeare 
to move or beginn any quarrell or contencon, betwene 2 the Sub- 
iectf of our Confederates frindf or Allies either in theire gooing 
forth or retornirig from any of theire voyages Wee therefore doe 
hereby straightly charge and comaund you the said Captaine 
Christofer Newport, and all other vnder your Comaund, that 
neither in your voyage outward or homeward, or in any Country 
Hand Port or place, where you shall abide, or come, during your 
time of being abroad, out of our kingdomes or Dominions, where 
you meete, w th any the subiectf of the king of Spaine, or of any 
other our Confederate frindf or Allyes, or of any other Nacon or 
people theire shippes vessellf goodf , or merchandizes, you doe not 
attempt or goe about to sett vpon take or surprize, theire psons 
Shippf vessellf goodf or merchandizes or offer any iniury or 
discourtesie vnto them ; as you will answere the contrary, at your 
vttermost pill? Except yo u shalbe by them first therevnto iustly 
provoked, or driven either in the iust defence of your owne psons, 
Shippt* vessellf goodf or m r chandizes by any their disturbance 
or hinderance whatsoever in yo r quiett course of Trade, or for 
recompence and recouery of the persons shipf goodf or mer- 
chandizes of any our Subiectf , that are allready in or neare the 
East Indies, or for any other iust cause of your defence, In w ch 
cases soe excepted, yf you attempt surprize and take, the psons 
shippf or goodf of any Prince or State, by whose Subiectf yo u 

1 An evident mistake for " aiid." 2 This should be " upon." 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 445 

shall susteyne any wronge, or Losse in manner as aforesaid, you 
shall not for any such act or actf grounded vpon the occacons 
aboue menconed, be in danger or subiect to the pill and penaltyes 
of our Lawes, Alwayes p r supposing and soe requiring you to 
vse all possible endeavo rs , by all meanes whatsoever, to suffer 
noe spoyle to be made of any goodes or merchandizes, nor 
imbeazaling of any thing whatsoever, that shalbe recouered by 
yo u . but to se them safely brought home, with the billf of lading 
and charter pties to thintent that there may be restitucon made by 
vs, soe soone as you shall receive satisfaccon from that State or 
people, by whome you are dampnifyed of what Nacon soever, 
And forasmuch as our said Subiectf the merchant^ and other the 
aduenturers of this voyadge out of providence and forsight of any 
mortallitie either by sicknes or otherwise w ch God forbidd should 
befall vnto our Subiect the said Captaine Christofer Newport, 
haue made choise of yo u our trustie and loving subiect, Joseph 
Saulbanck to succeede the said Captaine Christofer Newport, in 
the charge of principall Comaunder of all the persons imployed in 
this voyadge as aforesaid, wee doe alsoe in case such an accident 
should happen, allowe and approve of theire choise in that behalfe, 
And doe hereby giue full power and aucthoritie to you the said 
Joseph Saulbancke, to doe [and] execute, and 1 and eu r y thinge 
incident to the charge of Principall Comaunder of all the psons 
imployed in that voyadge as aforesaid in as ample mann r and 
forme, and to all intentf and purposes as is before Comitted and 
imposed vpon our subiect Captaine Christofer Newport And 
theis our Lres shalbe allsoe sufficient warrant and discharge to 
the said Joseph Saulbanck for the dooing and executing of all and 
singuler of all and singuler the p r miss 3 In witnes whereof wee 
haue caused theis our Lres to be made Pattentf Witnes our selfe 
at Westm r the Sixt day of January in the Ninthe yeare of the 
raigne of England ffraunce and Ireland and of Scotland the 
ffiue and ffortith 2 

p bre de private Sigillo 

Coppin. 



This should be " all." 2 6th January, 1611/12. 




446 FIKST LETTER BOOK OF 

ARTICLES OF Agreement made and concluded 
the Sixteenth daie of November 1614 betwixt the Gou r n r 
and Company of merchant? of London trading into 
the East Indies on the one pte : And S r Thomas Rooe 
knight on thoth[er] parte as followeth. 1 

|HEREAS the Gouerno r and Company haue nomy- 
nated the foresaid S r Thomas Roe and procured his 
ma tie : to employ him as his Embassador to the Grand 
Magore, for the better establishing and setlinge an 
absolute trade in any part?, w th in the Dominions of the greate 
Mogore aforesaid 

THE said Gou r ner and company, finding that they cannot 
convenyently proporcon any certanty for the expencfe] of Diett, 
both for S r Thomas Roe and his retinewe, doe leaue the 
managing thereof, to his Discrecon care and wisdome, relying 
vpon his frugallity, wherein he promiseth his vttermost endeavors, 
And to cause a iust accompt, to be kept of all expences, from the 
beginning to the End, as alsoe to deliuer vpp a pticuler, of what- 
soever shalbe allowed vnto him by the grand Mogore, And if 
it shall soe happen that the Grand Mogore, shall graunt a daylie 
or yearely allowance, vnto him for his diett and followers, during 
his abode there to countervaile those expences, That then he 
shall free the Company from the said chardge 

THE said S r Thomas Roe doth promise to forbeare all private 
Trade, for himselfe or any other either directly or indirectly and 

1 The negotiations which ended in the drawing up of this agreement will be found 
on the Court Minutes of the same date. The entry concludes " The Couenantes as 
" they be exactlie concluded and engrost, and past betwixt the Company and him, 
" are entred in the books wher y e Comissions be." 

The story of Sir Thomas Roe's embassy to the Great Mogul (1615-19) is well 
known from his Journal, which has been several times reprinted. Sir Thomas, a 
scion of a family of London merchants, had been knighted by James I. in 1604, and 
in 1609 had made an adventurous voyage to South America under the patronage of 
Prince Henry. After his return from India, he was in 1621 sent ambassador to 
Constantinople, where he remained seven years. In 1629 he was despatched on 
a special mission to Sweden, and afterwards to Copenhagen and various German 
courts. In 1641 Charles I. sent him as his representative to the Diet of Ratisbon, 
and on his return made him Chancellor of the order of the Garter, and a member 
of the Privy Council. He died in 1644. (See an interesting article in the Calcutta 
Rtvitw, June, 1857.) 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 447 

doth assure the Company by a faithfull promise to hinder it in 
others (All that he can[)], and to giue intelligence vnto them, of 
any that he shall take notice of to offend in that nature or shall 
by any meanes come to the knowledge of and wilbe ready to giue 
his best assistance vnto theire cheife ffactor, (vpon any occacon) 
to punish all offenders that shall deserue punishment, according 
to the quallity of theire offences 

AND lastly to free himselfe from all iust cause of doubt, 
concerning theire stock in the Country. Hee is willing not to 
intermeddle, w th any of theire moneyes there, as he doth volun- 
tarily offer, And will not desir[e] aboue the value of One 
hundred poundc vpon any spetiall occacons, to haue it repaid 
back againe out of his meanes, when they shall growe due. 
Promising not to haue to doe w th any parte of there m r chandize, 
but to Leaue it wholly to the Managing of theire facto 1 ' 8 , whome 
they shall appoint for theis purposes 

IN CONSIDERACON of the premiss 5 the said Gouern r and 
Company doe for themselfes and y r Successors promise to allowe 
vnto the said S r Thomas Roe yerely (for soe long time as he shalbe 
imployed in this service [)] the some of Six hundred poundf, 
Three hundred thereof to be paid in the Country at fower shilling^ 
sixpence the Riall, for his maintenance of Apparrell and other 
expences, And thother Three hundred pound shall yerely be 
put into the loinct stocke, to be ymployed for his benifitt ppor- 
tionablely w th all other aduentures. ffor his better encouragem 4 , 
whereby to tye his uttermost endeavo rs to be ymployed for the 
good of the Company, They were willing to giue him a true 
Testimony of theire affeccons. And therefore bestowed on him 
freely the some of fnve hundred markes ymprested vpon his 
Salarie to dispose of as he should thinke fitting 

THE said Gouerno r and Company desiring to be at a certenty 
conc r ning the wages of all such servant^ as shall attend him are 
contented to allowe him a hundred poundes p Annu for him to 
giue them satisfaccon, besides a preacher and Chirurgion whoe 
shall haue wages at the Companyes charge, the Preacher 5o u p 
Annu, and the Chirurgion Twenty and ffower poundf And did 
freely bestowe the some of Thirty poundf to be disposed by him 



44 3 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

for the Liueryes of his said followers, In consideracon whereof, 
he promiseth to entertayne none to attend him, but such as the 
Company shall approve of. 

THE said Gouerner and Company are likewise contented to 
deliuer vnto S r Thomas Roe the some of ffifteene 1 poundes in 
hand, being the one halfe of the yerely allowance, giuen by the 
Compn towardf the entertainem* of his followers, and alsoe ffiue 
and Twenty poundes, for the halfe of the yearely allowance given 
by them vnto the Preacher, and Twelue poundc for the like 
halfe yeares allowance vnto the Chirurgion, And for the time 
ensewing, it is agreed to haue them 2 halfe of theire said yearely 
allowance to be paid vnto S r Thomas Roe in the Country for 
theire dischardge 

AND lastly the said Gouernor and company are contented 
to lend vnto the said S r Thomas Roe, the some of one hundred 
poundes to buy plate for his Table, w cl1 some he promiseth to 
repaie back againe, at his retorne or deliu r the value thereof 
in Plate Or to haue it answered out of his Aduenture if he die 

MEMORANDUM whereas S r Thomas Roe Kt. hath receyved 
the some of Three hundred thirtie and three poundes six shilling^ 
and Eight pence 3 pte of the Salary w ch is to bee allowed him for 
the ymployment according to former agreement whereby there 
cannot be soe much put into the lointe stock, the first yeare as is 
formerly menconed, The said S r Thomas Roe doth therefore 
Couenant to haue one hundred markes more of his salarie to 
make vpp the full of ffower hundred poundes to be paid heare 
to such as he shall consigne it vnto. and onely Twoe hundred 
poundf put into the ioynt stock, for his vse in this his first yeare, 
of ymployment, The second yeare Three hundred poundes as 
was formerly resould 4 of and the like for the Third, w ch in theis 
Three yeares will arise to the some of Eight hundred poundes 
to be disposed for his benefit in the loinct stock accordinge to 
former Couenant and agreement 

IN WITNES of w ch agreement and Covenntf concluded the 

1 This should apparently be " fifty" (see the preceding paragraph). 

2 A mistake for " the one " ? 

3 i.e. the five hundred marks already mentioned. 4 This should be " resolued." 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 449 

said Gou r nor and Company haue for themselues and there Suc- 
cesso" caused theire Common Seale to be fixed to one pte thereof, 
And the said S r Thomas Roe, hath to the other pte put his hand 
and Seale the day and yeare first aboue written 




(AMES 1 by the grace of god king of England Scotland 
ffraunce and Ireland, defendo r of the ffaith &c : TO 
our trusty and welbeloued Subiect, Cap ae Nicholas 
Downton, WHERAS divers of o r lovinge Subiectf 
by the name of the Gou r ner and Companye of M r chant of 
London tradinge into the East Indies at their owne adventures 
costf and charge for the honor of this o r Relme of England, and 
for the encrease and advauncement of trade and M r chandize 
w th in the same, haue sett fourth sundrye voyagf to the said East 
Indyes and haue already discou r ed, and beginne to settle a trade 
in those ptf , And intending the continuinge therof, aswell by 
frequenting those placf alreadi settled, as by further discou r yes of 
oth r ptf w dl may be fit for interchanging of the Comodityes of o r 
kingdomes w th the Comodities of those placf , such as may be of 
spetiall vse and benefitt to vs and o r subiect^, Having to this 
purpose now p r pared and sett fourth ffoure good shippes called the 
Newyeares guift. Hector Hope & Solomon, to the said East Indyes, 
and the placf adioyninge thervnto. And wheras o r said 
subiect^ the adventurers of those voyage haue chosen the said 
Cap ne Nicholas Downto to be the principall Commander or 
Gen r all of all the m'chantf Maryn r s and other o r Subiect f w ch are 
or shalbe shipped in the said ffoure shippes We gratiously 
favouring their intended voyage, and approuing and allowing of 

1 A Royal Commission to Captain Downton (see note, page 318) for a voyage in 
1614, on account of the First Joint Stock. This document has been copied in a very 
careless manner, and it appears to be unfinished, nothing being said as to the person 
on whom the direction of the voyage is to devolve in the event of Downton's death. 
There is a minute of this grant at the Public Record Office (see Cal. of State Papers, 
E. Indies, 1513-1616, p. 277), under date i6th February, 1613/4, from which we learn 
that William Edwardes was the person nominated to succeed to the command. 

I H 



45 



FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 



their choise of y u [to] the same place of Commaund, being willing 
to furnish y u w th all fitt and convenient pow r and authoritye to rule 
& gou r ne all and euerye of o r Subiectf imployed in this voyage, 
by a due obedience to be by them yeilded vnto yo n in the 
observing and executing of all such goodf orders and constitucons 
as yo u shall thinke convenient to ordayne or make for the 
furtheraunce of the said voyage accordinge to such pticuler 
direccons and instruccons as yo n shall receive from the said 
Gou r ner and Company of M r chauntC the adventurers in this 
voyage w ch direccons and instruccons o r intention is, And soe 
we will and require yo u that yo u punctuallye observe in all thingf. 
WEE do therfore stracklye charge and command all and eu r y 
pson or psons ymployed in this voyage and shipped in those said 
ffoure shippes to give all due obedience and respect vnto yo 11 , 
during the said voyage, and to beare themselues one toward^ an 
oth r in good orde r and quietnes, for the avoyding any occacion, 
that might breede mutynie quarrellf or dessentions amongst them 
to the hinderaunce or good successe w ch is to be hoped for, by 
Godf prouidence of the said voyage, And in default of such 
dutye and obedience to be pformed toward^ yo u for the correcting 
and quenching of all such mutynies quarrellf or dessentions that 
may arrise by the euill and disorderly disposicons of any psons 
whatsoeu r . WEE do hereby authorize yo u the said Cap ne 
Nicholas Downton during the said voyadge or during so longe 
tyme as you shall liue in the said voyage. To chastice correct 
and punish all offendo" transgresso" in that behalfe, according to 
the quallitye of their offencf w th such punishmentf as are 
commonly vsed in all Armyes at Sea, when they are not capitall, 
And for capitall offence as wilfull murthe r w ch is hatfull in the 
sight of god, or Mutynie w ch is an offence that may tend to the 
ou v throw of the said voyage, the same being duly and iustly proued, 
against any of the pson or psons aforesaid WEE do hereby 
giue vnto you the said Cap ne Nicholas Downto during all the tyme 
of the said voyage or during so long as you shall liue in the said 
voyage, full power and authoritye to vse and put in execution our 
law called Martiall lawe in that behalfe. But that therin you doe 
expresly vse the advise and counsell of the two principall Masters 
and of the two principall M r chaunt appoynted for the tyme 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 451 

being, or of any two of them. And theis o r letters shalbe vnto you 
sufficient warrant and discharge for the doeing and executing of 
all and singuler the p r misses. AND forasmuch as at this p r sent 
tyme wee are in amitye w th all Christian Princes, And are 
vnwilling that any o r Subiecte should giue occacion of breach or 
hinderance therof towardf any o r Confederate freinde or Allyes 
And because we are not ignorant of the emulation and envye, w ch 
doth accompanye the discou r ye of Countryes and trade and of the 
quarrelle and contencons w ch doe many tymes fall out betweene 
the Subiecte of divers Princes, when they meete the one w th the 
other in forreyne and farre remote Countryes in prosecuting the 
course of their discou r ings ; And being desirous that our 
Subiecte should forbeare to moue or beginne any quarrell or 
contencons vppon the subiecte of o r Confederate friend e or 
Allyes eythe r in their going fourth or retouring from any of 
their voyage WEE therfore doe hereby straicly charge and com- 
maund yo u the said Cap ne Nicholas Downton, and all other vnder 
yo 1 ' gou r ment, that neyther in yo r voyage outwarde or homeward e 
or in any Countrye Island Port or place wher yo u shall abide 
or come during the tyme of yo r being abroade out of o r kingdomes 
or dominions wher you meete w th any the Subiecte of the king of 
Spayne or of any other o r confederate, friende or Allyes or of 
any other nation, or people, their shippes vesselle goode or 
M r chandize yo u doe not attempt or goe about to sett vpon take 
or surprize, their gsons, shippes, vesselle goode or M r chandizes 
Or offer any iniurye or discourtesie vnto them (except y u shalbe 
by them, first thervnto iustlye prouoked or driue, eyther in the 
iust defence of yo r owne psons, shippes vessells goode or 
M r chandizes by any their disturbances or hinderance whatsoeu r 
in yo r quiet course of Trade Or for recompence and recou r ye 
of the psons, Shippes goode r M r chandizes of any o r Subiecte 
that are already in or neare the East India or for any other iust 
cause of yo r defence In w dl causes so excepted, of y u attempt 
surprize and take the psons Shippes and goode of any Princes 
or State, by whose Subiecte y 11 shall sustayne any wronge or 
losse in mann r as aforesaid y u shall not for any such act or acte 
grounded vppon the occasions aboue menconed be in daunger 
or subiect to the ^ill and penaltyes of our lawes Alwayes p r sup- 

I H I 



452 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

posing and soe requiring yo u to vse all possible indeavo by 
all meanes whatsoeu r to suffer noe spoyle to be made of any 
goodf or M r chadize nor imbezilling of any thingf whatsoeu r that 
shalbe recou r ed by you, But to see them saufiye brought home 
w th their Billes of lading and Chart 1 pties, to the intent that their 
may be restitucon made by vs so soone as y u shall receive satis- 
faccon from that State or people by home you are dampnified of 
what nation soeu r . 




JAMES 1 by the grace of God king of England, Scot- 
land, ffrance and Ireland defend 1 " of the faith &c. TO 
our trustye and welbeloued Subiect Cap ne Dauid 
Middleton. WHERAS dyuers of o r louing Subiectf, 
by the name of the Gouern r and Companye of M r chantf of 
Londo, trading into the East Indyes at ther owne aduentures 
costf and charges for the hono r of this o r Realme of England 
and for the encrease and aduauncem* of trade and merchandize 
w th in the same, haue set forth sundrye voiagf to the said East 
Indyes, and haue alreadye discouered and begunne to settle a 
trade into those ptf, And intending the contynuinge therof, 
aswell by frequenting those placf alreade setled, as by furth r 
discoueryes of oth r ptf w ch may be fit for interchanging of the 
Comodityes of o r kingdomes w th the Comodityes of those placf, 
such as may be of speciall vse and benefitt to vs and o r subiectf. 
Hauing to this purpose now p r pared and set forth thre good 
Shippes, called the Samaritane, the Thomas and the Tomazin, 
to the said East Indyes, and the placf adioyning therunto, And 
wheras o r said subiectf the Aduenture rs of those voiagf, haue 
chosen y u the said Cap ne Dauid Middleto, to be the principall 
Comaund r or Generall of all the M r ch*f Maryners and other o r 
Subiectf w ch are or shalbe shipped in the said thre shippes, Wee 
graciouslye fauouring their intended voiage, and approuing and 
allowing of their choise of y u to the same place of comaund, 

1 A commission to Captain David Middleton (see note, page 115) for his voyage 
in 1614. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 453 

being wylling to furnishe y u w th all fitt and conuenyent power, 
and aucthoritye, to rule & gouerne all and eu r ye o r Subiectf 
employed in this voiage, by a due obedyence to be by them 
yeilded vnto y u in the obseruing and executing of all such good 
orders and constituoons as y u shall thinke conuenient to ordeyne 
and make, for the furtherance of the said voiage according to 
such pticter direccons and enstruccons as y u shall receiue from 
the said Gouern r and Companie of M r chant the Aduenturers 
in this voiage. W ch direccons and enstruccons our intentio is, 
And so wee wyll and require y u that y u punctuallye obserue in 
all thingf . WEE do therfore straictlye charge and comaund all 
and euerye pson or psons employed in this voiage, and shipped 
in those said three shippes, to giue all due obedyence and respect 
vnto y u , during the said voiage, And to beare themselues one 
towardf anoth r in good ord r and quietnes, for the auoyding any 
occasio, that might breede mutinye quarrells, or dissentions 
amongst the, to the hinderance of the good successe w ch is to 
be hoped for by God prouidence of the said voiage. And in 
default of such duitye and obedience to be pfourmed toward^ y u 
for the correcting & quenching of all such mutinyes quarrells or 
dissencons that may arise by the euill and disorderlye disposicons 
of any psons whatsoeu r , WEE do hereby aucthorize y u the said 
Cap ne Dauid Middleto, during the said voiage, or during so long 
time as y u shall Hue in the said voiage, To chastice, correct and 
punishe all offend" and transgresso rs in that behalf, according 
to the qualitye of their offence, w th such punishm^ as are 
comonlye vsed in all Armyes at Sea, when they are not 
capitall, And for capitall offenc^, as wilfull murthe r , w ch is hate- 
full in the sight of God, or Mutinye w** is an offence that may 
tend to the ou r throwe of the said voiage, the same being dulye 
and iustlye proued against any of the pson or psonnes aforesaid. 
WEE do hereby giue vnto y u the said Cap ne Dauid Middleto 
during all the tyme of the said voiage, or during so long as y u 
shall Hue in the said voiage, full power and aucthoritye, to 
vse and put in execucon our lawe called Martiall lawe in that 
behalf: But that therin y u do exp r slye vse the aduise and 
counsell of the two principall Maisters, and of the two principall 
m r chantf appointed for the time being, or of any two of them. 



454 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

And theis our Ires shalbe vnto y u sufficient warrant and discharge, 
for the doing and executing of all and singter the p r misses. 
AND forasmuch as at this p r sent tyme, wee are in amitye w th 
all Christian Princf, And are vnwylling that any o r Subiectf 
should giue occasio of breach or hinderance therof towardf any o r 
Confederates friend or Allyes ; And because wee are not 
ignorant of the emulatio and enuye, w ch doth accompanie the 
discouerye of Countryes and Trades, and of the quarrells and 
contencons, w ch do many times fall out, betwene the Subiectf of 
dyu r s Princf , when they meete the one w th the oth r in forreyne 
and farre remote Countryes, in prosecuting the course of their 
discou r yes ; And being desirous that our Subiectf should forbeare 
to moue or beginne any quarrell or contencon vppo the subiectf 
of our Confederates, friendf or Allyes, eith r in their going 
forth, or retourning fro any of their voiag[f] WEE therfore 
do herby straictlye charge and comaund y u the said Cap ne Dauid 
Middleto, and all ot[hers] vnd r yo r gouernm*, that neith r in yo r 
voiage outwardf or homewardf , or in any Countrye, Island Port 
or place, wher y u shall abide or come, during the time of yo r being 
abroad out of o r kingdomes or dominions, wher y u meete w th 
any the Subiectf of the king of Spaine, or of any oth r our 
Confederates friendf or Allyes, or of any oth r Natio or people, 
ther shippes vessells goodf , or m r chandizes, y u do not attempt, or 
go about to set vppo take or surprize, their psons, shippes, 
vessells, goodf, or M r chandizes, Or offer any iniurye or 
discourtesie vnto the, (except y u shalbe by the first therunto 
iustlye prouoked or driue, eith r in the iust defence of yo r owne 
persons, Shippes, vessells good or M r chandizes by any their 
disturbance or hinderaunce whatsoeu r , in yo r quiet course of 
Trade, Or for recompence and recou r ye of the persons, Shippes 
goodf or m r chandizes of any our Subiectf, that are alreadie in or 
neare the East Indies, or for any oth r iust cause of yo r defence [)], 
In w ch cases so excepted, if y u attempt surprize and take the 
psons Shippes and goodf of any Princes or State, by whose 
Subiectf y u shall sustayne any wrong or losse in mann r as afore- 
said, y u shall not for any such act or actf grounded vppon the 
occasions aboue menconed, be in daung r or subiect to the pill and 
penaltyes of our lawes. Alwayes p r supposing, and so requiring 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 455 

y u to vse all possible endeuo rs , by all meanes w e soeu r , to suffer no 
spoile to be made of any good? or M r chandizes, Nor imbezilling of 
any thinge whatsoeu 1 ', that shalbe recou r ed by y u , But to see 
them sauflye brought home w tl1 their Billes of lading & Chart r 
pties ; to the intent that ther may be restitucon made by vs, so 
soone as y u shall receiue satisfaccon from that State or people by 
whome y u are dampnifyed of what Nacion soeu r . In wytnes 
wherof wee haue caused theis o r ires to be made Pattentf. 
Witnes o 1 ' self at Westm r the one and twentith day of Aprill, in 
the Twelfth yeare of o 1 ' raigne of England France and Ireland, and 
of Scotland the seuen and fortith. 

Coppin. 
Per fere de priuato Sigillo. 



A declaration of the opinions of vs the Gouern r and 
Company of M r ch*^ of Londond trading into the East 
Indies, what we thinke fitt to set downe as Enstruccons 
for the right Hon ble S r Tho : Roe, 1 his Ma ties Embassador 
residing w tl1 the great Mogoll. concerning the setling of a 
Trade in Persia. 

[first THAT yo r Lo pp receiue due informacon from 
Armenians Moores and such oth r M r ch*f , as trade out of 
Persia into the Mogores dominions, of the distance of 
place, wher the Silke is principallye to be had, vnto 

the Port, that may be most comodious for our Shippes to repaire 

vnto. 

2. A^SO to take good knowledge of a suffic* Port, both for 
fitnes (in regard of repaire, and entrance therunto) as also for the 
saufetye of o r people and goodf . 

3. LIKEWISE of the quantitye of Silke that is yearlye 
bought by m'ch 4 ^ and exported out of Persia. As also of the 
currant price, that it beareth in those part ordinarily, And 
what the charge therof may be, by cariage from that place vnto 
the Port wher wee ar to lade it To the end that the principall 
cost and charge, may plainlye appeare vnto vs. 

1 See page 446, note. 




456 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

4. WHICH pointf being dulye examined and informacon 
taken accordinglye then to consid r of some fitting pson or persons 
(two or three at the most) whome yo u may send to treate w th the 
King of Persia, on our Kinge behalf, for the establishment of such 
a Trade w th vs as will aunswer w th o r meanes and ventf of our 
Comodityes . well enstructed by yo r Lo pp in the Articles 
following, and such oth r thingf as to yo u shall seme most 
convenient, And therin to lymit the charge, according to yo r 
Lo ps discrecon, for that wee haue fownd the expencf of Richard 
Steele, 1 to be verie extraordinarye and much distastfull to the 
Company 

5. AND the better to enhable them to treate w th the Kinge 
of Persia or his officers, wee haue sent yo u a Coppie of the 
Capitulacons, agreed vppon betwixt the Kings Ma tie and the Grand 
Sig r . for our free Trade into Turkey, wherby (w th yo r Lo pps good 
helpe) such Articles may be framed ther to be sent w th them, as 
may be fit to be pnted to the King of Persia for the establishm* of 
what wee desire : least being referred to their setting downe 
somwhat may be mistaken to o r disadvantage And for the better 
enhabling of yo r Lo : therin, wee haue set downe such other 
notes, as wee thinke fit to be incerted. 

To say. 

1. THAT there may be a certaine rate agreed vppon for 
Customes or Tolles (yf any be ther payable) and that w th as much 
fauo r as may be. 

2. THAT ther may be assigned vs a saufe and secure Port, 
wher o r shippes may ride, w th out pill of the Seas, and daunger of 
the Enemyes, And wher our Mart for the selling of ours, and 
buying of their comodityes may be setled, w th out ou r farre cariage 
into the Countrye. 

3 THAT wee may haue some good assurance, That for 
their Silke they will accept at the least th'one half of English 
comodityes at reasonable rates, especiallye Cloath at 20 li str p 
Cloath or 80 Ryalls of 8. 

Blewe Kersies of 20 yardf p peece at 25 Rf of 8 p peece 
Northerne Kersyes in coulo rs of 17 yardf the Kersye, at 16 
Re of 8. 

1 See note on next page. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 457 

Tynne in barres, at 30 Rf of 8, the 100 w 4 English 
Batterye 1 ats Brasse kettles, at 40 Rf of 8 the 100 w 4 
The other half to be paid in ready mony, Spicf and oth r 
Indian comodityes. 

6. AND the better to explaine o r selues, what wee desire, 
That the price of Silke may be contracted for more certaintie, 
and some good assurance giuen that it may be laden cleare of all 
charge, abourd our shipps, at a Riall & a half of 8 the pownd of 
16 ouncf , w ch is the greatest price that we can resolue to giue, 
and is more then the whight China silke doth cost in the Indies, 
that is sould here for aboue 2O S3 the pownd of 16 ouncf . And 
this Persian silke sould here (according to ordinarie price) not for 
aboue i6 ss the pownd of 16 ounc^. 

At w ch pricf , and good condicons as aforesaid wee shalbe able 
to take from the Persian yearlie 8000 Bales of his silke, of i8o h 
English ech Bale or ther aboutf Yo r Lo: may pceiue what o r 
desire is by the p r misses, But if yo u cannot effect it in the same 
mann r & condicons, Then to trye howe neare yo u may bring it 
thervnto. And therof to certifye vs w th all possible expedicon, 
That according as wee find cause wee may precede. 



Honor 11 ', and right wor** Sirs z 

HAUE since my coming home ouerland proposed the 
Trade of Rawsilkes from Persia, the rath r because 
the kinge of Persia haue giuen way to yt by Cape 
lasqus found out the tyme I spent in Persia, 
being a Cape of the mayne 30 leagues lowe of Ormus toward 
Sinday, S r Robert Shirley heard not of this Cape, vntill he had 
yt from my self, for at his being in Embassadg from his Maister 

1 Metal articles, especially of brass or copper, wrought by hammering ; hence 
apparatus for preparing or serving meals (cp. the French batterie de cuisine). 

2 A letter from Richard Steel, undated, but probably written at the latter end of 
1616 or the beginning of 1617. Steel, " a young man of Bristol," had crossed Persia 
in the summer of 1614 in pursuit of a fraudulent debtor, and, making his way to 
Surat, had given so glowing an account of opportunities for trade in Persia that he 
was despatched with another factor to Ispahan to obtain the necessary firman. 
Having effected his object, Steel, in accordance with his instructions, made his way 




458 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

the Sophey he proposed onely oth r 4 Portf in the Persian 
Countrye, to say, Damon, Batan, Barin, and Rochell, 1 w (:li are 
Portf that a shippe of aboue one hundred Tonnes can hardly 

overland to England, where he arrived in May, 1616. He was well received by the 
Company, and went out again in Captain Pring's fleet in February, 1617, reaching 
Surat in October of that year ; and for some time after, Steel, and his wife, and his 
waterworks project (which seems never to have come to anything) were a sore trouble 
to Sir Thomas Roe. Steel returned with Roe in 1619, and received a very cold 
welcome at the hands of the Company. His offers of service in October, 1623, were 
declined ; but a few years later, having secured some powerful influence to back him, 
he was more successful, and in January, 1626, was once more in the Company's 
employment. He was sent "to the southwards," i.e. to Java, though not without 
opposition on his part, as he desired to return to the scene of his former employment. 
His private trading soon gave cause for complaint, and in 1627 the Court determined 
to peremptorily recall him ; and here his history closes. 

1 It may be of interest to quote in this connection the account given of these ports 
in "a noate of the portes in perseia : obserued from S r Robertt Sherley:", which 
was enclosed in a letter to the Company from Thomas Keridge, dated from Ajmere, 
20th March, 1614/5 (O.C. 270) : 

" Damone is the seconde porte w th in lasques and is the best and strongest in the 
11 kinge of perseias Domynyons, itt lyeth 3 lea: of Ormus right oposyte therevnto, 
11 where Rydeth all mann r of Shippes, w th out feare or Danger exceptt itt be of att Sea : 

" Batan lyeth 35 lea : w th in Ormus a very good Roade, itt hathe a smale Hand 
" lyinge in the mouthe thereof, by w ch itt is defended from the wynde w h Cometh of 
" the Sea, and is nott muche vnlyke the Baye of Saldanya att Cape esperance, saue thatt 
" itt is nott so big, itt is nott fortefyed, butt hathe a smale Cyttye where is greate 
" trade of the pearle \v^ is brought from Bareyne. 

" Bareyne is an Island vpon the Coaste of Arabya 40 lea : of the Coaste of perseia, 
" itt yealdes no profitt for Comodytye, exceptt only the fishnge of pearle w ch are 
11 esteemed to be y e richest and best in the worlde, this Hand the kinge of perseia, 
' tooke from the porting : and keepeth a Garison of 800 horse thereon this place is 
' ' Invyroned w th shoales in suche sorte, thatt smale fustoes very often runne agrownde 
" and is nott nauygable w th vesselles of Burthen. 

" Rashell lyeth 80 lea : from Ormus w th in the Gulfe of perseia, itt is well fortefyed 
11 and hathe 5 fad : water on the one syde and 7 fad : on the other syde thereof, the 
'kinge keepeth there Contynually 100 fustoes and Galleys w th them to Cutt of all 
" passengers thatt Offer to goe from Ormus to Balsora, w ch is the Turrkes Domynyon, 
" and no porting: vessell approache in sight butt they Chase them, and some 8 yeares 
" synce they tooke a porting : shippe of 1400 tto 8 : for breache of the premises, this 
" Rashell is a fyne towne, and hath a nauigable Ryu r for Boates of Burthen in 8 
41 dayes to goe vp to Sherase w^ is the second Cyttie in perseia and 10 dayes lourney 
" w 1 * Cam 11 8 : from Espahawne, the kinges Chiefe Seate." 

Damone appears from this description to be Gombroon; Batan is perhaps 
Bostanah, near Lingeh ; Bareyne will at once be recognized as Bahrein ; and Rashell 
(otherwise Raxel) is Reshire (near Bushire), now an insignificant village, but once a 
well-known port. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 459 

Anker ther, and yet nearer Ormus, then Cape lasqus w ch I haue 
bene credibley enformed of that shipping of 5 or 6 hundred 
Tonnes may Ancho r w th in Sacar 1 shott of the shore, w cb great 
shipping as I iudge is fitter to deffend the assault of the Portugalls 
then those of smaler burthen. 

Secondly, I proposed the trade w ch the Portugalls had from 
Sinday to Ormus in transportations of Persians, Turkes, Indians 
and Armenians goodf, w ch amounteth yearly to aboue 60 thousand 
poundf at 14 Cent as haue bene paid ; and that I haue found 
the M r chante willing to embrace being weary of their long trauaile 
ouer land from Lahoare vnto Spahan in Persia, w ch is 5 monthes 
lourney besides the toyles and Customes w th losse of many 
Camells by reason of their heauy comodityes, as Indicoes, Drugs, 
Carpets Cheetes* Pintadoes, all sort? of Lynin, Sugers, Rise, and the 
like, for of my knowledg ther passeth yearlye from Lahoare to 
Persia 12 or 14000 Camells load? of these Comodityes for the vse 
of Persia, and Turkey, and before the peace broken twixt the 
Persian and Portugall, ther passed not ou r land yearly 5 or 6 
hundred Camells, But the Portugalls through their pride, doth 
make the Persian M r chantf seeke to them for their sea passage, 
w ch is not aboue 12 daies sayle, and hauing the comoditie of the 
Riuer Indus, w ch passeth through the famous Cittye of Lahoare, for 
the desent of their comodityes to Sinday. 

Thirdly, I proposed furnishing both the Mogores, & the 
Persians Countrye w th spices, and Cheiny Comodityes, wherof 
pepper is the chief, in w dl I dare spend my .Judgment those 
2 Countryes vent? more then all Europe, and althoughe it 
groweth nearer to either of those Countryes then ours, as along 
the Coast of Malabars and oth r part? in the Portugalls handf , yet 
I find it not sould much cheaper then in England, as a briefe 
Tareg sheweth 3 the reason that neith r the Persians nor Mogores 
people dares bring it by sea, in feare of Confiscation of life and 
good? to the said Portugalls, being as they say the king? 
Comoditye to pay the souldiers, I iudge that pepper may be 
brought from Bantam to Suratt or Sinday. for the Mogores people 



1 Saker (see note, page 82). 2 Chintzes (see note, page 59). 

3 See page 462. 



4 6o FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

and to Cape lasqits for the Persian at better rates then they fetch 
it from the fflemings in Messelpotania, 1 through the kingdomes of 
Dekane being 5 Thousand & odd myles by Camell. 

ffourthly I proposed how needfull it was to giue way vnto 
certaine shipping in the Countrye, for the contenting of the 
Gouzerates, Cambayans, and Lahoares, in conuey of their shippes 
for the Red Sea, or oth r partf, w dl shipping are at Suratt Baroch, 
and Goga, to the number of 12 sayle of shipping, ech shippe 
aboue 600 Tonnes w ch dare not stirre for feare of the Portugalls, 
for I haue heard the chief of those M r chant saye that the Trade 
of the English is not the wipeing away of y e Thousand part of 
their Comodityes w ch vented when they had peace w th the 
Portugalls, wherby I iudge that it was better to find out some 
trade in those partf for the employing of shipping then that 
4 or 5 shippes should stay from October vntill March at the 
Barre of Suratt for those 2 Comodityes w ch I haue found their 
Ambassadors and ffryars at Agra desire might come to passe 
when I terrefied them w th the ioyning of our Nation and the 
Holland" when they should haue more then their handf full. 

ffiftly, I proposed for a water worke, w ch might giue the Chief 
Cittye of the Mogores content, vent Lead, and bring both ou r land 
promtt to the wo r Company w ch is to be don vppon the Riuer 
leminy* w ch passeth by Agra, from w ch Riuer the whole Cittye is 
supplyed, although they haue great toyle in fetching it on 
Camells, horses, Chariottf, Oxen, mens backf, to their houses; 
for water in those hott partC is verry comfortable, and I doubt 
not but eith r the king will giue a good gratification or the people 
of that Cittye pay quarterly or yearly for yt, as of that of Broken 
Wharff, 3 and this contenting the Mogor, wilbe meanes to furth r 
any oth r buisines in his Countrye ; yf this water worke go 
forward, it is fitt the Iron and Brasse workf and many wheeles 
be prouided here, for it would be too toilsome, in those hott 

1 The Dutch had established a factory at Masulipatam in 1614. 

2 Jumna. 

3 A name familiar to Londoners of the time as the site of one of the forcing 
engines that supplied the city with water. " One other new forcier was made near to 
" Broken Wharf, to convey Thames water into men's houses of West Cheap, about 
" Paul's, Fleet Street, &c., by an English gentleman named Bevis Bulmer, in the year 
" J 594 " (Stow's Survey). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 461 

Countryes for our people to worke by fier, the tyme is short, and 
therfore yf this worke proced this yeare, it is tyme to thinke of yt, 
I haue proposed these thingf, w ch in my Judgment may one day 
take effect, although ther ar little hopes this yeare, yet I doubt 
not but ere next fleet, ther may be such a carefull preparacon 
made in the Countrye, by the honest industrey of yo r seruantf, 
that those partf shalbe better discouered then at present, and 
if in case yo r wo^ 3 should giue way to the preceding into Persia 
this yeare, for an Introduction or begining, w ch may well be 
perfourmed w th smale chardge (to wit) yt is likely godwilling that 
this fleet ariue in October at Suratt, wher they may set forward 
that buisines and afterward proced for Cape lasqus; for neith r the 
daung r nor chardge wilbe more in Coasting that 14 daies sayle, 
then lyeing expecting the retourne of Indicoes, and Calicoes, from 
A madebars, and in case this take effect, that yt would please yo u to 
appoint S r Thomas Roe as Embassado r from our king to the 
Sophey of Persia, whose creditt and entertainment wilbe well 
esteemed the rath r for that he hath bene w th the great Mogor, and 
somwhat made fitt for businesses of those partf , I shall willingly 
keepe him Companye in so worthey buisines, and be a help for 
obteyning many fauou 1 ' 8 from the said Sophey, for the agreement^ 
and giueing way to some part of his silkes may come for England 
vppon our securitye being resident w th him. 

I presented my seruice to yo r wo?? 8 at 2OO U p Ah wagf to 
serue 5 yeares, and in case of preceding for Persia or any other 
buisines, I haue proposed to haue the setting on of it, in that 
I thinke my self not ignorant of the Language of those partf, and 
peoples Natures, and willing to encount r the daung r ous heates & 
treacheryes of the lesuitf and Portugalls, for the seruice of my 
Countrey ; I desire also to be permitted to put in 3Oo u venture in 
the water worke of Agra or oth r buisines I shall pfourme in the 
Countrey, w ch godwilling I will manadge, w th my best and honest 
endeuo 1 ' 3 , for the dischardge of my dutye in a good conscience, 
to ward C my worthy employers, and vpright dealing before god, 
who giueth a blessing to mens honest desires. And forasmuch as 
since May that I came home, I haue not disposed my self for any 
other gen r all or pticier employmentf w ch I might haue had, but 
depended vppon yo r WO PI)S seruice and in mainteyning the Mogors 



4 G2 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

name so giuen me at Court, I haue not altogeth r bene so 
prouident of my estat as I might haue bene, that if it shall please 
yo u to remember me towardf my prouison I shall rest most 
thankfull, and remaine yo r wo 1 ' 1 ' 3 seruant in all obeidience. 

Richard Stcll. 

A brief tar eg 1 of Persia. 

Ther may vent in Persia yearly 500 Broad Cloathes of 13 or 
I4 U Cloathes being light Colo r ed as Vennice Redds, Stamells, 
Purples, Violets, 2 Light Watshats 3 Greens both Grass and Popengeys* 
at 3 d0 riadf p Couetto of 37 ynches and 2000 Colou r ed kerseyes at 
25 do riadf p pece. 

Tyn worth p Mohan 80 Shahies the Mohan being lo 1 ' English 
weight w ch is 2 s8 8 d p pound. 

Lead worth p Mohan 20 Shahies, being 8 d p pound. 

Iron worth p Mohan 25 Shahies, being io d p pound. 

Pepper worth p Mohan 40 Shahies being i6 d p pound. 

Sinamond at 36 Shahies p Mahan, being I4 d p pound. 

Cloues worth 55 abasses p Mahan ech abasse 4 Shahies or i6 d 
w ch j s ^ss ^a p pound. 

The retournes or inuestrnentf w ch may be had from Persia is 
principaly in Raw silkf at 7 8S 6 d our pound of 16 ounce, brought 
downe to Cape Jasqus w ch lyeth 18 daies Journey from Spahan, 
the chief Cittye of Persia of this Comoditye the Persian Countrey 
yearly yealdeth 7700 Camells loadf of 50 Mahans p load ech 
Mahan io u English, This pcell of Rawsilke goeth for vent through 
Turkey by meanes of the Customes wherof the Turk keepes 40 
thousand men in armes against the Persian, w ch when the Persian 
shall haue hopes of venting his silkes by Sinicus Persicus will out 
of doubt giue faire Capitulacons and agreementf . 

1 Tariff, or rate list, literally "explanation." " Riad " is a mistake for " riall." 
"Couetto " is the Portuguese "covado," which was reckoned to be about an English 
ell. Shahis and abbasis are still current, and are now worth about one halfpenny and 
twopence respectively. "Mahan" is mann (cp. the Indian maund), of which there 
are now three principal kinds, viz. the mann-i-tabrizi (Tabreez mina), equal to about 
7$ Ibs., the mann-i-shahi (Royal mina), equal to about 15 Ibs., and the mann-i-hashimi 
(Hashimi mina) equal to 116 Ibs. . 

2 These are all denominations of stuffs of the red-blue series (see page 96). 

3 See page 98, note. 4 See page 96, note. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY, 463 

Rubarbe, groweth in Persia, and is worth 40 Shahies p Mohan 
pound. 

Wormseedf 1 groweth in Persia, and is worth 2O 2 Shahies p 
Mahan or I2 d p ti. 

Carpetf of all sortf ar bought by the eye, 3 both of silke, 
and silke & gould, silke & Gotten, and of all Gotten, wherof the 
Persian Country haue plenty. 



[AMES 4 by the grace of God king of England Scotland 
ffrance and Ireland, Defend 1 " of the faith &c. TO our 
trustye and welbeloued Subiect and Seruant Beniamyn 
Joseph and to our trustye & welbeloued Subiecte, 
Henry Pepwell of Londo Gent. WHERAS dyuers of o r louing 
Subiectf , by the name of the Gouern r and Com- 
panie of the M r ch*f of Londo trading into the 
East Indyes, at their owne aduentures, cost? and chargf , for the 
hono r of this o r Realm e of England and for the encrease and 
aduauncem* of Trade, and m r chandi^e w th in the same, haue set 
forth sundrye voiagf to the East Indies, and haue alreadie 
discouered and begunne to settle a Trade, into those partf , And 
intending the contynuing therof aswell by frequenting of placf 
alreadie setled, as by furth r discoueries of oth r partf, w ch may be 
fit, for enterchanging of the Comodityes of o r kingdomes w th the 
Comodityes of those placf , such as may be of spiall vse and 
benefit to vs and o r Subiectf, hauing to this purpose now p r pared, 
and set forth fyve good shippes, called the Charles, the Vnycorne, 
the lames, the Globe and the Rose, to the said 

(& ye Swanne.) ' . 

East Indies, and the placf adioyning therunto. 
AND wheras our said Subiectf the Aduenture 1 ' 8 of those voiagf, 
haue chosen Beniamyn loseph Captaine and Cheif Coinaund r of 

1 See page 199, note. 2 30 ? 

3 i.e. for their beauty. 

4 There is a minute of this commission in the Public Record Office, under date 
2ist December, 1615. Joseph commanded the 1616 fleet, but was slain on the way 
out in a fight with a Portuguese carrack. 6th August, 1616. Pepwell, who succeeded 
him, carried the fleet to Surat, and thence to Bantam, but did not live to return to 
England, dying, it would seem, in the early part of 1618. 



464 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

all the m r chant, maryners and oth r our Subiectf, w ch shalbe 
shipped in the said fyve shippes, WEE graciouslye fauouririg 
their intended voiage, and approuing and allowing of their choise 
of yo u to the same place of Captaine and Cheif Comaund 1 ", being 
wylling to furnishe yo u w th all fitt and conuenyent power and 
aucthoritye to rule and gouerne all and euerye our Subiectf 
employed in this voiage, by a due obedyence to be by them 
yeilded vnto y u in the obseruing and executing of all such good 
orders and constitucons as y u shall thinke conuenient to ordeine 
and make for the furtherance of the said voiage, according to 
such pticier direccons and institucons, as y u shall receiue fro the 
said Gouern r and Companie of M'ch'f the Aduenture 18 , in this 
voiage : w dl direccons and instruccons, our intencon is, And so 
wee wyll and require y u , that y u punctuallye obserue in all thingf, 
WEE do therfore straictlye charge and coraaund all and euery 
person and persons employed in this voiage, and shipped in 
those said fyve, shippes, to giue all due obedyence and respect 
vnto y u , during the said voiage, and to beare themselues one 
toward^ anoth r in good ord r and quietnes, for auoyding any 
occasion that might breede mutinye quarrell or dissencon 
amongst them to the hinderance of the good successe (w ch is to 
be hoped for by Godf prouidence[)] of this said voyage, And in 
default of such duitye and obedience to be pfourmed toward^ y u , 
for the correcting and quenching of all such mutinyes, quarrells or 
dissencons, that may arise by the euill and disorderlye disposicon 
of any such psons whatsoeu r , wee do herby aucthorize y u the said 
Beniamyne Joseph during the said voiage, or during so long time 
as y u shall hue in the said voiage, to chastice correct and punishe 
all offend and transgresso [ rs ] in that behalf according to the 
qualityeof their offence, w th such punishm^ as are comonlye vsed, 
in all Armyes at Sea, when they are not capitall, And for Capitall 
offence, as wilfull murth r , (w ch is hatefull in the sight of God) or 
Mutinye, w ch is an offence, w cl1 may tend to the ouerthrowe of 
the said voiage, wee do herby giue vnto y u the said Beniamyne 
Joseph, during all the time of the said voiage, or during so long 
time as y u shall Hue, in the said voiage, full power and auctho- 
ritye to vse and put in execucon our lawe called Marciall lawe in 
that behalf, but that therin y u doe exp r slye, vse the aduise and 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 465 

councell of y e two principall maisters, and of the two principall 
m'ch^ , appointed for the time being, or of any two of the, And 
theis o r ires shalbe vnto y u suffic* warrant and discharge, for 
the doing and executing of all and singuler the p r misses. AND 
FORASMUCH as at this p r sent tyme, wee are in amitye w th all 
Christian Princf , And are vnwylling that any o r Subiectf , should 
giue occasion of breach or hindraunce therof, towardf? any our 
Confederate friend^ or Allyes, And because we are not ignorant 
of the emulacon and enuye, w ch doth accompanie the discouerye 
of Countryes and Trades : and of the quarrells and contencons 
w cl1 do many times fall out, betwene the Subiectf of dyuers 
Princf, when they meete the one w tk the oth r in forreyne and 
farre remote Countryes, in prosecuting the course of their dis- 
cou r yes, and being desirous that o r Subiectf should forbeare to 
moue or beginne any quarrell or Contencon, vppo the Subiect^ 
of o r Confedatf , friendf, or Allyes, eith r in their going forth, or 
retourning from any of their voiagf , WEE therfore do herby 
straightlye charge and comaund y u the said Beniamyne Joseph, 
and all oth r vnd r yo r gouernm*, That neith r in yo r voyage, 
outward or homeward, or in any Countrye Island, Port or place 
wher y u shall abide or come, during the time of yo r being 
abroade, out of our kingdomes or dominions, wheer y u meete, 
w th any the Subiectf , of the king of Spaine, or of any oth r our 
Confederate ffriendf or Allyes, or of any oth r Nacion or people, 
their Shippes, vessells, goodf , or M r chandizes, y u do not attempt, 
or go about to set vppo take or surprise their psons Shippes 
vessells goodf or m r chandizes, or offer any iniurye or discourtesie 
vnto the (Except y u shalbe by them first therunto prouoked or 
driuen, eith r in the iust defence of yo r owne persons, Shippes 
vessells, good or m r chandizes, by any their disturbaunce or 
hinderaunce whatsoeuer in yo r quiet course of Trade, or for 
recompence and recouerye, of the personnes Shippes, goodf or 
m r chandizes of any of our Subiectf, that are or haue bene 
alreadye in or neare the East Indies, or for any oth r iust cause 
of yo r defence, or recompence of losses sustayned[)] ; In w ch 
cases so excepted, if y u attempt surprize and take the personnes 
Shippes and goodf of any Prince or State, by whose Subiectf 
y u shall susteyne any wrong or losse, in manner as aforesaid, y 11 

i i 



466 F//eST LETTER BOOK OF 

shall not for any such act or actf, grounded vpp5 the occasions 
abouemenconed, be in daung r or subiect to the perill and penal- 
ties of our lawes AND WHERAS by o r tres Pattentf, 1 graunted 
to the said Gouerno r and Companie of M r chant of Londo, trading 
into the East Indies, wee haue straightlye charged and pro- 
hibited, all oth r our Subiectf of what condicon soeuer, to trade 
visite or frequent, by way of m r chandize into the said East 
Indies, or into any of the Islandf or Portf therof vppo paine 
and forfeicture not only of their goodf and m r chandizes, but 
also of their Shippes and furnyture therof WEE therfore by 
theis p r sent, do also giue full power and aucthoritye to y u , if 
in this yo r voiage both outward and homeward, y u do meete w th 
any of the Shippes or goodf of any our Subiect f, oth r then such 
as are set out, or spiallye lycensed or pmitted therunto by the 
Gouern r and Companie aforesaid, And pticterlye if y u chaunce 
to light on, S r lohn fferne 2 knight, or any of that Companie, or 
the Shippes or goodf of any of them, [(]who disobeyed latelye o r 
Comaundm* of desisting their intended voiage, signifyed vnto 
them in ffraunce, by our Roiall ires vnd r our Priuye Scale) to 
arrest, take, and seize, the Shippes and goodf of all and euerye 
of them, and of all oth 1 ' our Subiectf, so offending, the one half 
or the value therof, vppon indifferent appraisem 1 to be reserued 
to o r vse, and the oth r half to be conuerted to the vse of the 
Gouern* and Companie aforesaid, And as for the pson or psons 
of the said S r Ino fferne and Consort^, and of all oth r offending 
as before is said, we do also aucthorize y u to deteyne them in 
yo r custodie and to bring them, or so many of them as y u shall 
apprehend, saufelye back into England w th y u , here to aunswer 
such matters as shalbe obiected against them, for doing contrarye 
to o r Comaundm*, expressed in o r said tres Pattentf, and for their 
contempt r? and offence, comytted and done against o r Roiall 
lawes. AND wheras the Gouern r and m r chantf aforesaid haue a 

1 The charter of sist May, 1609. 

2 One of the interlopers who from time to time troubled the Company's peace. 
Rumours were spread in 1615 of his intended voyage to the East Indies from Brest, 
and Pepwell was reported to be one of those engaged in the expedition. Feme seems 
to have set sail in spite of a positive command to the contrary from James I., but 
what success he met with is not known. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 467 

furth r purpose aft r the accomplishing of yo r said voiage into the 
East Indies, to vse yo r furth 1 ' seruice for some time, in visiting 
their seu r all plantacons and place of residence, and in setting 
such Orders both in the same, and in such oth r place, as they 
shall direct y u vnto, for the benefit of their Trade and Traffique 
WEE also allowing of their intenrons and purposes therin, do 
herby straictlye charge and comaund y u to followe such In- 
struccons and direccons in that behalf, as y u shall receiue from 
the said Gouern r and m r chant^ aforesaid, and in no wise to 
contrarye the same, as y u will aunswe 1 ' the contrarye at yo r pills. 
AND forasmuch as o r said Subiectf the m'ch^ and oth r the 
Gouern r s of this voiage, out of prouidence, and foresight, if any 
mortalitye, either by sicknes or oth r wise (w ch God forbid) should 
befall the said Beniamyne Joseph, haue made choise of our 
trustye and louing Subject Henry Pepwell, to succeede the said 
Beniamyne Joseph in the charge of Cap ne and Cheif Comaund 1 ' of 
all the persons employed in this voiage, as aforesaid, we do also 
in case such an accydent should happen, allowe and approue of 
their choise in that behalf, And do herby giue full power and 
aucthoritye vnto y u the said Henry Pepwell, to do and execute all 
and euery thing incydent to the charge of Captaine and cheif 
Comaunder of all the persons employed in this voiage aforesaid, 
in as ample manner and forme to all intentf and purposes as is 
before comytted and employed vppo the said Beniamyn Joseph, 
And theis our ires shalbe also sufficient warrant and discharge to 
y u the said Henry Pepwell, for the doing and executing of all and 
singuler the p r misses as aforesaid. IN WYTNES wherof we haue 
caused theis our tres to be made Patent^. WYTNES our self at 
Westm r the twentith day of December, in the Thirtenth yeare of 
o r Raigne of England ffraunce and Ireland, And of Scotland the 
nyne and fortith. 1 

per breue de priuato Sigillo. Coppin. 



1615. 

i I i 




468 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

[AMES 1 by the grace of God King of England Scotland 
ffraunce and Ireland defender of the faith &c, TO 
THE Threr Chauncellor Vnderthfer, and Barons of 
our Exchequer, for the time being, to all our Justices 
Officers and Ministers for the time being, To all Customers, 
Comptrollers ffarmo rs of Customes Searchers and Wayters, in any 
of our Portf for the time being, And to all the Officers Ministers 
and subiectf of vs our heires and Successo for the time being, 
to Whome it shall or may appertaine greeting WHEREAS Wee by 
our Lres Pattentf sealed w th our greate Scale of England, bearing 
date the One and Thirteth daie of May in the Seaventh yeare of 
our raigne of England ffraunce and Ireland, and of Scotland the 
Tvvoe and ffortith, of our espetiall grace certen knowledge and 
meere Mocon did for vs, our heires and successo" graunte vnto 
the Gouernor and Company of Merchant^ of London, trading 
into the East Indies and theire Successo, That yt should and 
might be lawfull to and for the said Gouerno 1 and Company and 
theire Successo 1 " 3 to shipp and transport out of this our Realme of 
England, or the Domynions of the same in any theire voyages 
to or toward^ any the partf in our said Lfes pattentf menconed, 
All such forraigne Coyne of Siluer, Spanish or other forraine 
Silver or other Ballion of Silver, as they should bring or cause to 
be brought, into this Realme of England, from the partf beyond 
the Seas either in the same kinde, sort, stampe, or ffashion, 2 to be 
coyned w th in our Mint, w th in our Tower of London, at theire 
pleasure, Soe as the Whole quantety of Coyne or Moneyes, by 
them to be transported in any theire said voyages, should not 
exceede the value or Some of Thirty Thousand poundf in any 

1 There is a minute of this grant in the Public Record Office (see Cal. of 
State Papers, E. Indies, 1513-1616, p. 449). It would be interesting to trace the 
circumstances in which this important patent was applied for and granted ; but 
unfortunately just at this point there is a break in the Court Minutes, owing to the 
loss of one of the volumes of the series. Probably the following entry, which occurs 
in the minutes of the last meeting recorded in this year (loth Nov., 1615), relates to 
the subject : " M r Governor signified vnto this Courte that the cause of his absence 
" at there last meetinge was, by reason of his attendaunce w th my Lord Chauncellor 
" and M r Secretarye in procuringe the Bill from his Ma tie : for the pattent, w ch at 
" last w th greate difficultie hee obtayned, and this Courte gaue him thankes for his 
" greate paines taken therein." 

2 Some words have been omitted here (cp. page 485). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 469 

one voyadge, as in and by the said Lfes Pattentf (amongest diuers 
Covenfitf grauntf powers privilidges aucthorityes and other thingf, 
therein conteyned[)] more at lardge appeareth. AND WHEREAS 
by our royall proclamacon, given at Whitehall the Three and 
Twentith day of March last past before the Date hereof, Reciting 
as therein is recited (for the consideracons therein expressed, and 
by the advise of our privie Councell [)] , Wee did publish and declare 
and straightly charge and comaund as well our Threr of England, 
Chancellor of our Exchequer, and Warden of the Cinque Portf 
or his Deputie, as all other our Judges, Barons of the Exchequer 
Justices officers and ministers, and more especially our Customers 
Comptrolers and searchers, and theire Deputies and Waighters, and 
alsoe the ifarmo" of our Customes in any of our Portf, and theire 
Deputyes or Waighters, and all other our officers and Mynisters, 
to Whome it might apptaine, and all our SubiectC in generall, 
That all statutes made and in force against the exportacon of 
Golde or Siluer in Coyne, lewell plate or vessell, or howesoever, 
should be straightly and duely kept, and observed, and diligently 
and carefully prosecuted, and putt in execucon, vpon paine not 
onely of the Penaltyes, and forfeitures in the said Statutes or 
any of them conteyned, but alsoe of our high Indignacon and 
displeasure, and such prosecucon and censure as should bee fitt in 
a cause of State, and alsoe upon paine of our high Indignacon, losse 
of Office and other condigne censure, against such our Officers 
and Mynisters, as should bee remise or negligent in the execu- 
con of our said Lawes, or in the pformance of that our royall 
Comaundement AND WEE did further by the said Proclamacon, 
straightly charge and comaund all Merchant^ and theire ffacto ra 
Maisters of Shippf , Marriners Passengers, and all other our loving 
subiectf, whatsoever, that should haue any notice of gould or 
siluer in Coyne lewells Bullyon Plate or vessell, or otherwise 
howsoever, w cl1 had beene then exported by the space of Twoe 
yeeres last past before the date of our said Proclamacon, or 
should bee thereafter exported or should be shipped for exportacon 
(reasonable charges for the voyage onely excepted[)] or should be 
gathered and gott togeather, by change or otherwise, w th intencon 
to export, or w th intencon to put it into the handes, of them w ch 
should export it, That they forthw th should reveale, the same to 



470 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

our Threr of England, or vnderthrer for the time being, Or to 
the Warden, or Deputy Warden of the Cinque Portf, To our 
Attorney gen r all, or some other of o r Learned Councell, for the 
time being, for w ch theire discou r y they should receiue in reward 
the one halfe of the said Gould or Siluer or the value thereof, 
And on the other part, if they should not discover the same, they 
should incurr and receiue such punishment, as by our Lawes 
and Statutes, or otherwise by our prerogatiue Royall, should be 
meete to be inflicted vpon them for theire offence and contempt 
in that behalfe, as by our said Proclamacon more at large ap- 
peareth KNOWE YEE nowe That wee being resolued by all 
the waies and meanes we maie to further the worthie endeavors 
of the said Company for the Contynewance and enlargment of 
Trade into the Indies and other remote partf as alsoe for theire 
better encouragement therein, rinding by the experience of that 
Trade for diuers yeeres nowe last past, That there groweth noe 
Detryment or inconvenyence, in this our Common welthe by such 
theire transportacon of forraine Coyne and Bullion, but on the 
other side That an extraordinary benifitt, groweth to our king- 
dome through the said Trade, by carrying foorth and venting the 
natiue Comodities of this our Realme into the Countryes and 
Territories of many greate and powerfull Princes, not form r ly 
knowne, or traded vnto by any of our subiectf, w ch tendeth to the 
greate renowne and dignitie, of our Royall person and gouern- 
ment, to the greate honour and enrichement of our Subiectf and 
State, which benefitt to vs and our Subiectf , is likewise encreased 
by the bringing into this our Realme of many rich and necessary 
forreine Comodityes, w ch are to be bought by our Subiectf in 
greate plenty, and at reasonable rates, and doe much encrease 
our Custornes and Revenewe, and the plenty of such forreine 
Comodityes is soe greate, That a Staple of them beginneth to 
settle in this our kingdome; Soe as besides the Store w ch 
aboundantly serveth our owne Subiectf , a greate pte thereof is 
carried, out into Germanic Italic Turkic and other places, to 
supplie the want of our Neighbo", and other Countries, In w ch 
course many greate Shipes, and expert Marryners, are from time 
to time employed not onely to their pticuler good, but likewise 
to the honour and benefitt of our kingdome in generall And 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 471 

although we thought it not convenient, to make an excepcon 
thereof in our Proclamacon yet wee were allwayes resolued, not 
to countermaund or restraine the said exportacon as aforesaid, 
but to continue it by waie of reconfirming our said Lres Pattentf , 
w th &Non Obstante, of our said Proclamacon THEREFORE, out 
of our Princely disposicon, not intending the said Company should 
receiue any preiudice, by reason of our said Proclamacon or any 
thing therein conteyned, but that they should be at full Liberty, 
to transport such Coyne and Silver as aforesaid in as ample 
manner, as they haue done maie might or ought to doe by force 
of our said Royall graunt to them in that behalfe made, and the 
rather for that the Coyne and Bullion of Silver soe to be 
transported, is onely of forreine Silver and such as shalbe by the 
said Company brought into the Realme, or by them or any of 
them procured, to be brought from the partf? beyond the Seas, 
and of that alsoe in such reasonable quantity and proporcon as 
hath bene thought fitt and convenyent, and is in our said Lres 
Pattentf expressed, of our especiall grace certaine knowledge, 
and meere mocon, haue granted and confirmed, And by theis 
present^* for vs our heires & Successo 1 ' 8 doe graunt and confirme, 
vnto the said Governor and Company of Merchant^ of London 
trading into the East Indies, and theire Successo rs , That it shall 
and may be lawfull to and for the said Governor and Company, 
and theire Successo rs , to Shipp and transport, out of this our 
Realme of England, or the Dominyons of the same in any theire 
voyages to or toward C any the partf in our forsaid Lres Pattentf 
menconed or expressed, all such forreine Coyne of Siluer, 
Spannish or other forreine Siluer, or Bullion of Siluer, as they 
haue heretofore sithence the Date, of our said Lres Pattentf 
before menconed, brought or caused to be brought into this 
Realme of England, or shall at any time or times hereafter, bring 
or cause to be brought into our said Realme from any partf 
beyond the Seas, either in the said kind sort stampe or fashion, 
w dl it had or shall haue, when it was or shall be brought in as 
aforesaid, or in any other forme stampe or fashion, to be coyned 
w th in our Mynt, w th in our Tower of London, at theire pleasure in 
as lardge and ample manner, as they heretofore haue done, or 
might or ought to haue done, or hereafter can may might or 



472 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

ought to doe by vertue or force, and according to the true intent 
and meaning of our said Lres Pattentf*, before menconed or of 
any thing therein conteyned ; Our said Proclamacon before 
menconed, or any Lawe Statute Acte of Parliament Proclamacon 
or Provicon, heretofore had made enacted, sett forth or provided, 
or any other matter or thing whatsoeuer to the contrary notwith- 
standing WHEREFORE wee doe by theis present^ for vs our 
heires and Successors, straightly charge and comaund you the said 
Threr Chancellor Vnderthrer, and Barons of y e Exchequer the 
Warden of the Cinque Portf and his Deputie, The said ludges 
Attorney generall, and the rest of our learned Councell, and all 
other Justices, Customers, ffarmors of our Customes and other 
Officers Mynisters and Subiectf of vs our heires and Successo 
for the time being, to whome it shall or may apptaine, That you 
and every of yo u , doe from time to tyme & at all tymes hereafter, 
quietly permit and suffer the said Governour and Company of 
Merchantf of London, trading into the East Indies, and theire 
Successo r % to shipp lade and transport such Silver, or Bullion of 
Siluer as aforesaid according to the true meaning of our said 
former Lres Pattentf and of theis presentf, And theis present^ 
or the Inrolement, or exemplificacon thereof shallbee vnto you 
and every of you to whome it shall or maie apptaine a sufficient 
warrant & discharge in that behalfe. WILLINGE alsoe and 
comaunding, by theis presentf for vs our heires and Successo 1 ' 8 
That the said Governor and Company and theire Successo rs , or 
any of them for any Transportacon, of such Silver or Bullion of 
Silver as aforesaid at any tyme or tymes sithence the Date of our 
said Lres Pattentf, and according to the true meaninge in the 
same expressed, made or hereafter to be made, be not by yo 11 or 
any of yo u in any wise molested troubled sued ympeached 
hindered or disquieted ; AND WHEREAS wee are given to 
vnderstand, the said Governour and Company of Merchantf of 
London trading into the East Indies, at theire owne aduentures, 
costf and charges, for the honour of this our Realme of England, 
and for the increase and aduancement of Trade and Merchandize 
w u 'in the same haue sett foorth sundry voyages, to the East 
Indies, and haue allready discouered and begun to settle a Trade 
into those partf, and intending the contynewing thereof aswell by 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 473 

frequenting of places already setled, as by further discoveries of 
other ptf , w ch may be fitt for interchaunging of the Comodities, 
of our Kingdomes, w th the Comodities of those places such as may 
be of especiall vse and benifitt to vs and our Subiectf AND 
for that wee are likewise credibly informed, that in such and the 
like enterprizes and voyages, greate losse and hinderance hath 
happened, by the Mutinous and disorderly carryage of the 
Marriners and Saylors shipped, and employed in the said voyages, 
because none amongest them haue beene sufficiently aucthorized 
to punish the offendo, according to theire desert : ffor refor- 
macon whereof the said Gouernour and Company of Merchant^ 
of London, trading into the East Indies haue beene humble 
suito rs , vnto vs that they might haue Power, and aucthoritie 
from time to time hereafter to elect and choose a Captaine 
or Captaines or cheife Comaunders to be employed by 
them in any of theire voyages, whoe alsoe might haue 
power and aucthority for the better governing & ordering 
of theire people in theire seuerall voyages, and to vse 
and exercise Martiall Lawe, vpon such mutinous and 
disordered psons as shallbe amongest them. WEE gratiously 
tendering the good successe of theire voyages, and to the end, 
that such as should goe and be imployed therein, may bee the 
better ordered and governed of our espetiall grace certen know- 
ledge, and meere mocon, haue given and graunted, and by theis 
present^ for vs our heires, and Successo rs , doe giue and graunt 
vnto the said Governor, and Company of Merchant^ of London, 
trading into the East Indies and theire Successo 1 " 8 . That it shall 
and maie be lawfull, to and for the Gouernor of the said 
Company, or his Deputie and Comittees, or the greater number 
of them, that shallbe soe assembled by the appointment, of the 
said Governour or his Deputie, for the time being, at all time 
and tymes hereafter, to nominate elect and choose, and to 
employ in any and every of their voyages hereafter to be made, 
one or more Captaine or Captaines, or principall Comaunder or 
Comaunders to rule and governe all and every our Subiectf , in 
such voyages in a due obedience to be by them yealded vnto, 
The said Captaines or Principall Comaunders in the observing 
and executing of all such good orders and constitucons, as the 



474 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

said Company shall thinke good to ordeine and make for the 
furtherance of such voyages AND the said Captaynes or prin- 
cipall Comaunders, for any good cause, to amove and displace, 
at the will and pleasure of the said Gouernour and Company, or 
his Deputy and Comittes, or the greater number of them that 
shalbe soe assembled, by the appointment of the said Gouernor 
or his Deputie for the time being AND for the better effecting 
of our will and pleasure herein, wee doe by theis pnt for vs our 
heires and Successo" giue and graunte full power and aucthority 
vnto all such Captaines or principall Comaunders, as shallbe soe 
as aforesaid nomynated and chosen and employed to goe in any 
such voyage, having Comission and Direccon, from the said 
Gouernour or his Deputy and Comitties and the greater number 
of them that shalbe soe assembled by the appointm* of the said 
Gouerno r or his Deputy for the time being, vnder the Scale of the 
Company appointed for that purpose, vnto [whom] wee doe like- 
wise hereby, for vs our heires and Successo rs , giue full power and 
aucthority to graunt Comission or Comissions or Direccons and 
instruccons vnto theire Captaines or principall Comaunders for 
the punishing of Offences and executing of Martiall Lawe vnder 
theire said Scale according to our pleasure, hereafter in theis 
pntf declared, to chastice correct and punish all and every of 
our Subiectf , or other persons to be employed in any such voyage 
w ch shall not giue due obedience, and respect toward f the said 
Captaynes, or principall Comaunders, or not beare themselves 
one toward f another in good order and quietnes for avoyding of 
any occacon that might breede, quarrell or dissention amongest 
them to the hinderance, of the good Successe w ch is to be hooped 
for by Godf providence in any such voyage, according to the 
quality of theire offences, w th such punishment^ , as are comonly 
vsed in all Armyes at Sea, when they are not Cappitall, and for 
Cappitall offences, as wilfull murther, w ch is hatefull in the sight 
of God, or mutynie w ch is an offence w ch maie tend to the over- 
throwe of such voyadge, The same being duly and iustly proved, 
against any of the j>son or psons aforesaid to vse and put in 
execucon the said Lawe called Martiall Lawe AND neverthelesse 
by the verdict of Twelue of the Company, sworne therevnto, for 
the tryall of such offenders, as in such a case apperteyneth, And 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 475 

theis our Lies Pattentf , or the enrollment thereof, shalbe aswell 
vnto the said Gouernour and Company of Merchant? of London 
trading into the East Indies for the time being, as vnto the said 
Captaines, or principall Commaunders for the time being, and to 
all others whome it shall concerne, a sufficient warrant and dis- 
charge for the dooing and effecting of all and euery the premiss 8 , 
according to the true intent & meaning of this our Graunt, 
Notw th standing our pleasure is, That the said power vse and 
exercise of Martiall Lawe, shall continewe onely, vntill the same 
shall by any Six or more of our privie Councell, whereof the 
Lord Thferer for the time being to be one vpon good cause to be 
revoked WILLINGE and comaunding hereby the Captaines or 
principall Comaunders soe to be nomynated and chosen as afore- 
said, to followe, and principally to observe in all thing? such 
Comission instruccon and direccons, as they shall receyve, from 
the said Governor or deputie and Comitties aforesaid vnder the 
foresaid Scale, and in noe wise to contrary the same as they will 
answere the Contrary at theire pills AND THEREFORE our 
will and pleasure is, And wee doe by theis pnt? , for vs our heires 
and Successo" graunt vnto the said Governor and Company of 
Merchant? of London trading into the East Indies And to theire 
Successors, That they shall and maie haue and vse, from tyme 
to tyme one Scale engraved on the one side w th 

Scale appointed. c 

the representacon, of our pson in our Roabes and 
on the other side, The said Scale to be engraved w th a Portcullis 
supported by twoe Lyons, 1 AND, wee doe hereby will and comaund, 
That all and every Comission, and Comissions w ch shall hereafter, 
be made foorth by the said Company or any of them by vertue 
of theis present shallbe sealed w th the said Scale, AND foras- 
much as at this present tyme, wee are in amytie w th all Christian 
Princes, and are vnwilling that any our subiect?, should giue 
occacon of breache or hinderance thereof, toward? any our 
Confederates frind? or Allies, And because wee are not ignorant, 

1 No other description can be traced of this special seal of the Company, and no 
impression of it is known among the India Office Records. Possibly, however, a 
specimen may one day be brought to light, either in a public or private collection, for 
there would presumably be many occasions for its use. Such a discovery would be 
deeply interesting. 



476 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

of the emulacon and envie, w ch doth accompany the discoverie of 
Countryes and Trades, and of the quarrells and contentions, w ch 
doe manytymes fall out betweene the Subiectf of diuerse Princes, 
when they meete the one w th the other in forraine and farr 
reemote Countryes, in prosecuting the course of theire discoveries 
And being desirous that our SubiectC, should forbeare to move 
or beginn any quarrell or contencon vpon the subiectf of our 
Confederate, frindf or allies, either in theire gooing foorth 
or retorning from any of theire voiages WEE therefore doe 
hereby straightly charge and comaund the said Gouernour 
and Company of Merchant^ of London trading into the East 
Indies and all Captaines or principall Comaunders, by them at 
any time hereafter to be employed in such Voyages and all 
others, w ch shall be vnder theire Gouernment that neither in 
theire voyages or any of them outward or homeward or in any 
Country Island Port, or place where they shall abide, or come 
during the time of theire being abroad, out of our kingdomes or 
dominions, where they meete w th any the subiectf of the King of 
Spaine or of any other of our Confederates, frindf or allies, or 
of any other Nacon or people, theire shippf vessells goodf or 
merchandizes, they doe not attempt or goe about, to sett vpon 
take or surprize, theire psons shippes vessells, goodf or mer- 
chandizes, or offer any Iniurie or discourtesie vnto them, except 
they shallbe by them first therevnto, iustly provoked or driven 
either in the iust defence, of theire owne psons Shipes vessells 
goodf or merchandizes, by any theire disturbance or hinderance 
whatsoever in theire quiett course of trade, or for Recompence 
and recovery of the psons Shippf goodes or merchandizes, of any 
our Subiectf, that haue beene allready in or neere the East 
Indies, or for any other iust cause of theire defence, or recom- 
pence of losses susteyned ; In w ch cases soe excepted, if the said 
Capptaines or principall Comaunders, or any others vnder theire 
gouernment, shall attempt surprize and take the persons Shippes 
and good^ of any Prince or State, by whose subiect^ they shall 
susteine any wronge or losse in manner as aforesaid, The said 
Gouernour and Company or theire Captaines and Comaunders 
shall not, for any such act or actf grounded vpon the occacons 
aboue menconed, be in danger or subiect to the pill and Penalties of 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 477 

our Lawes, AND to the end That the said Gouernour and Com- 
pany, maie from time to tyme be truely informed, of the successe 
and event of such voyages, as shallbee sett foorth to the places 
aforesaid, and nothing maie be concealed from them, w ch maie be 
fitt for them to knowe, either touching the said discovery and 
trade, or touching the goodf that shallbe exported, and imported 
by reason thereof, the carriage and demeanour of any, mer- 
chant, ffactor Marriner or other pson or psons to be employed 
by the said Company or 1 any of the said voyages or otherwise, 
touching any accident or Circumstance Materiall, happening in or 
about any such voyadge WEE doe hereby for vs our heires and 
Successo", give full power and aucthority, vnto the Governour of 
the said Company for the time being, or his Deputie or any Six 
of the Comittees of the said Company, for the time being to 
examyn vpon oathe any cheife Comaunder Captaine m r merchant 
ffacto r Marryner or any other pson employed in or about any of 
the said voyages, vpon any such Interrogatories Articles or ques- 
tions, as to them shall seeme meete and convenyent concerning 
the said voyage discovery trade or goodes. or any other inateriall 
circumstance, tending to the true and certaine informacon of the 
said Gouernor and company, And if any pson or or psons, being 
therevnto called or required shall refuse to take such oath, or 
having receyved the same, shall receiue 2 or neclect to answere, 
directly and effectually, to such questions and Interrogators 
concerning the premisses as he shallbe examyned of. Then to 
comitt all and every such pson and psons soe refusing to take 
such oath or refusing or neclecting to answere such questions or 
Interrogatories, to any our Prisons w th in the Cittie of London, 
there to remaine w tll out bayle or Mainprize, vntill such pson shall 
conforme himselfe and be sworne and examyned as aforesaid 
ALTHOUGH expresse mencon of the true yeerely value or 
certainety of the premiss 8 or any of them or of any other guiftf 
or grantf , by vs or any of our progenito" or p r decesso ra to the 
foresaid Gouernour and Company of Merchant^ trading into the 
East Indies, or any of them heretofore made in the theis pntf is 
not made or any Statute Acte Ordinance provicon Proclamacon or 

1 This should be " in." 2 A mistake for " refuse." 




478 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

restrainte to the contrary thereof, heretofore had made ordeyned 
or provided or any other thing cause or matter whatsoever to the 
contrary in any wise notwithstanding IN WITNES whereof 
wee haue caused theis our Lres to be made Pattentf WITNES 
our selfe at Westm r the fourteenth Daie of December in the 
Thirteenth yeere of our raigne of England ffraunce and Ireland 
and of Scotland the Nyne and ffortith. 1 

p frre de Private Sigillo 

Coppin. 
examinat p me Thomam Marten. 



|NTO 3 a kinge rightly descended from his Ancestors, 
bred in millitary affaires, and clothed w t]l honour 
and lustice. 

A Commaunder worthie of all comaund strong and 
constant in the Religion, w cl1 the greate Prophett Christ did 
teach, Kinge lames, whose love hath bred such 

Translation of the . . , . 

Grand Mogores ire impression, in my thoughtf, as shall never be 

to his Matie, J ' 11 r A 

Sent by M' steeie forgotten, but as the smell of Amber, or as a 

& dd in May. 1616. ' 

garden or fragrant nowers, whose bewtie and 
odor is still increasing soe be assured my Loue shall growe and 
increase w th yo rs . 

Your Lre w ch yo u sent me in the behalfe of your merchant? , 
I haue receyved whereby I rest satisfied, in your Tender Loue 
towardf me, and desire yo u not to take it ill, for not having writt 
vnto yo u heretofore, for this my present Lre I send to renewe our 
Loues, and herew th doe certifie yo u , that I haue sent foorth my 
firmaundf , through all my Country to this effect, That if any 
English Shipps or Merchant^, shall arive in any of my Port? my 
people shall pmitt and suffer them to doe what they will, freely 
in theire merchandizing causes ayding and assisting them, in all 
occacon of Iniuries, That shallbe offered them, and that the 
least cause of discourtesie be not done vnto them, as alsoe that 

1 1615. 

3 This letter is printed by Purchas (Lib. IIII., ch. 16, 10). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 479 

they bee as free, and freer, then myne owne people, as nowe 
and form r lie I haue receyved from yo u diuers tokens of your 
Loue, soe I desire yo r mindfullnes of me, by some Nouelties 
from yo r Country as an Argument of ffrindship betweene vs, for 
such is the Custome of Princes here. 

And for yo r merchant^ I haue giuen expresse order through 
all my Countryes to suffer them to sell by transport, and carry 
away at theire pleasure, w th out the lett or hinderance of any pson 
whatsoeuer, all such goodf and m r chandize or other thingf as 
they shall desire to buy, And lett this my Lfe as fully satisfie 
you, in the desired Peace and Loue as if my owne sonne had 
beene the messenger to ratine the same 

And if any in my Country not fearing God nor obeying theire 
Kinge, or any other voide of Religion, should endeavor or be an 
Instrument to breake this league of ffrindship I will send my 
sonne Sultan Corome 1 a Souldier approued in the warres to cutt 
him of. That noe obstacle maie hinder the continewance and 
increasing of our affeccons 



|AMES 2 by the grace of [God] king of England Scotland 
ffraunce and Ireland Defend 1 ' of the faith &c To 
our high Trear and Admirall of England and to all 
other our Admiralls Vice admiralls Captaines and 
others serving vpon the Seas, And to all Mayors lustices 
sherifff Bailiff^ Cunstables Customers Comptrowlers Surveyo ra 
keepers of our Porte Creekes and passages, and to all other 
our officers ministers & subiectf whatsoever to whome in that 
behalfe it shall or may appertayne, and to eu r y of them gretinge 
Whereas in the first Session of our Parliament holden at Westm r 
in the first yeare of our Raigne of England ffrauce and Ireland, 
and of Scotland the Seaven and Thirteth. One acte of Parliam* 



1 Khurram, third son of Jahangir, and afterwards the emperor Shah Jahan. 

2 There is a minute of this grant in the Public Record Office (see Cal. of State 
Papers, E. Indies, 1513-1616, p. 469). 




480 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

was made Intituled an acte for the well garbling of Spices, 1 
whereby it was ordeyned and enacted, that from and after the last 
day of September then next ensewing the end of that Session 
of Parliament, All Spices Wares DruggC and other m r chandizes 
Garbleable, That is to saie Pepper Cloues Mace Nutmuggf 
Sinamon Gynger, Long Pepper Wormeseedes Comynseede Anni- 
seedes Culliander seedf, Bynney Pepper, Almonde Dates Galls 
Gumes of all sortf and kindf Garroway seedf and all other 
Spices Drugc wares & other merchandizes that had beene 
garbleable Spikenard Ballingall Turmarick Setwell Cassia fistula 
Binny pepper Seny Barbaries Rice Ereos Stauesacre, Calamus 
ffenncreeke Cassia Lignea graines 2 vsually garbled or ought to be 
garbled clensed seu r ed sorted or devided in the Citty of London 
and the Libertyes thereof, should for the fees vsually allowed in 
that behalfe be sufficiently clensed seu r ed garbled and devided 
& afterwardf sealed by the Garbler therevnto appointed for the 
time being, or by his sufficient Deputie or Deputies servant or 
servantf , before that the same or any parte thereof should be 
sould vpon paine of fforfeyture, of all and euery such drugf, 
wares and other merchandizes or the value thereof w ch should be 
sould, As by the said Act more at lardge appeareth. And 
whereas the true intent and meaning of the said Act was that 
none of the said Spices drugf wares and merchandizes brought 
into this Realme should be vttered or sould to the end to be vsed 
in meatf drinkf and other needefull occacons amongest our 
Subiectf \v th in this realme before such time as the same were 
sufficiently clensed seu r ed garbled and deuided as is aforesaid 
And the true meaning of the said Act did not in any sorte extend 
to the clensing seu r ing garbling and deviding of any such the said 
Spices drugf wares and m r chandizes as should be transported out 
of this Realme in such sort as they were brought into the same, 
or ells should 3 in whole Packf Caskes or sackf to any person or 
psons to remaine vntill it come to be after vsed by our subiectf 

1 See note, page 199. 

2 This list has got into some confusion. All the words between "kindes" and 
" beene " should really come between "graines " and " vsually." The list, for correc- 
tions in spelling, may be compared with that on page 199. 

3 " Sould " appears to be meant. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 481 

w th in this realme or any other our Dominions And whereas it 
is found that by some gen r all woordf that passed in the said 
Acte noe ware m r chandizes or Coniodities, that are garbleable 
being brought into this realme can be sould betweene Merchaunt 
& Merchaunt vngarbled to the intent to transport the same 
into the partf beiond the Seas, or to be sould againe in whole 
sale, But the Seller thereof by the strict Lfe of the said Statute, 
shall thereby be in Danger to forfeite all the said Spices Druggf 
Wares and Merchandizes w dl he shall soe. sell vngarbled or the 
value of them And whereas wee are certenly informed, That 
our louing subiectf , the Gouernor and Company of merchant^ 
of London, trading into the East Endies, haue allready here- 
tofore in theire severall voyages made into the East Indies 
brought from thence into this our Realme of England greate 
quanteties of Spices wares merchandizes and coniodities, garble- 
able more then could be vtterred or spent, within this our said 
Realme in many yeares and shall still from time to time in the 
continewing of theire said Trade to the East Indies, bring from 
thence greate quanteties of such Spices wares merchandizes and 
commodities, garbleable more then can for present vse of our 
subiectf be vtterred or spent within our realmes or Dominions, 
And haue beene therefore humble Suto rs , to vs, to haue our 
Licence to sell from tyme to time in whole packf Sackf and 
Caskes such quanteties and soe much of all such Spices Wares 
Merchandizes and Comodities, garbleable w cb they shall bring or 
haue retorned in any of theire voyages or Shippes from the said 
East Indies, into our said Realme of England, as to them should 
seeme good or as may most tend to theire profntt^ and benefittf 
in groce and vngarbled, w ch by reason of the said Statute they 
make doubt to doe, w th out our spetiall Licence in that behaife 
which ffavor if we graunt them not, greate quantetyes of theire 
said Shippes 1 Wares and Merchandizes, will continewally ly vpon 
theire handf to theire greate losse and damage And whereas wee 
haue formerly by our Lres Pattentf 3 dated the Twoe and Twentieth 
daie of May in the Seaventh yeare of our Raigne of England 
ffraiice and Ireland and of Scotland the Twoe and ffortith 

1 A slip for " Spices." 

2 Now in the India Office, among the " Parchment Records" (No. 4). 

I K 



482 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

graunted to our welbeloued subiectf the Gou r nor and Company 
of Merchant^ trading into the East Indies and theire successo rs a 
dispensacon and Declaracon with and of the said Statute in the 
case aforesaid, w ch neu r thelesse is defectiue, and attayneth not 
the full Libertie of our royall intencon toward^ them. Nowe 
knowe yee therefore that wee gratiously tendring the wellfaire & 
Comodities of our said louing subiectf the Gouerno 1 ' and Company 
of Merchant^ of London trading into the East Indyes and theire 
Successo 1 " 8 , And to the End they may be the better enabled to 
maintaine and continewe theire trade and Traffique in the East 
Indies of our espetiall grace certaine knowledge and meere 
mocon, haue giuen and graunted, And by theis present^ doe 
giue and graunt full and free Libertie Licence power and 
aucthority vnto the said Gouernor and Company of Merchant^ of 
London trading into the East Indies, and to theire Successo" 
That it shal[l] and may be lawfull to and for them, and euery 
person and persons being free of the said Company at all tymes 
hereafter and from tyme to tyme at theire owne free wills and 
pleasures to vtter sell and put to sale such quantityes, and soe 
much of all or any sortes of Spices, wares and merchandizes and 
Comodities w ch they shall bring and haue retorned in any of theire 
voyages or shippes from the said East Indies into this our said 
Realme of England, or any part thereof; as to them or any of 
them shall seeme good, or as may most tend to the proffitt and 
benefitt of them or any of them in whole greate Packf Sackf or 
Caskf? vngarbled, and not clensed severed sorted or devided to 
any merchant or merchant^ or other pson or psons aswell our 
naturall borne subiectf as aliens denizens or straingers w th out any 
danger damage losse forfeiture or penaltie vnto the said Gouernor 
and Company of Merchant^ of London trading into the East 
Indies, and theire Successors, or any person or psons being free 
of the same Company or vnto any of them, by vs or to our 
behalfe to be had taken lost forfeyted or incurred, and without 
any manner of Lett trouble interrupcon or disturbance of any 
other pson or psons whatsoever, The said Statute before recited, 
or any other Statute Acte Lawe Custome vsage restraint pro- 
hibition or thing to the Contrary thereof in any wise notwith- 
standinge And wee further for vs our heires and Successors of 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 483 

our like espetiall grace certaine knowledge and meere mocon, 
doe giue and graunt full and free Libertie, power Licence and 
aucthority vnto all and every merchant and merchant^ person 
and psons whatsoeuer aswell our naturall borne subiect^ as 
Alyens Denizons or strangers that they and eu r y or any of them 
shall and lawfully may bargaine for buy receiue and take of the 
said Gou r no r & Company of merchant^ of London trading into 
the East Indies, and theire Successo rs for the time being and of 
all and every person and of all and euery person and psons being 
free of the same Company or of any of them any such spices 
drugf wares merchandizes, and comodities in whole greate Packf 
Sackf or Caskes, as aforesaid before the same be garbled clensed 
severed or devided w th out any damage losse fforfeyture or Penaltie 
against them or any of them by vs or to our vse and behoofe to 
be had taken lost forfeyted or incurred, and w th out any manner of 
Lett trouble interrupcon or disturbance of any person or psons 
whatsoeuer The said Statute or any other statute, acte lawe 
custome vsage restrainte prohibicon or thing to the Contrary 
thereof in any wise notwithstanding Paying vnto vs our heires 
and Successors from time to time all and eu r y such Customes 
Subsidies somes of money, and other duties, as are or ought to 
bee answered and paid to vs our heires and Successors for or by 
reason of the transportation of any the said Spices Drugf wares 
merchandizes and Comodities soe to be transported as is afore- 
said, Prouided allwaies that if any merchaunt or merchant^ or 
other person or persons whatsoever aswell naturall borne subiectf, 
as alyens denizens and strangers, w ch shall bargaine for buy 
of the said Gouernor and Company of Merchant^ of London 
trading into the East Indies or theire Successo rs for the time 
being or of any person or persons beinge free of the same 
Company any such spices drug wares or m r chandizes soe 
bought as aforesaid in whole greate Packf Caskes or Sackf 
vngarbled and not clensed seuered sorted or devided as is 
aforesaid shall at any time afterward^ put any of the said drugg 
wares or merchandizes soe bought as aforesaid to sale or other- 
wise vtter the same w th in the Realme of England or any other 
our kingdomes dominions or Territories, w ch Spices shall not be 
afterwardf exported but sould w th in this our Realme for inward 

I K I 



484 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

vse That then eu r y such person shall incurr and fall into the 
Losse penaltie and forfeiture in the said recited acte conteyned 
This our present graunt or any thing therein expressed to the 
contrary notwithstanding: And further of our more abundant 
grace certaine knoweledge and meere Mocon, wee doe for vs our 
heires and Successo graunt pdon remise and release vnto the 
said Gouerno 1 and Company of merchant? of London tradinge 
into the East Indies S r Thomas Smithe knight nowe Gouerno r of 
the same Company Morrice Abbot Deputy and William Harrison 
Tresorer to the said Company, And to Robert Offley Robert 
Johnson, Robert Bell William Holliday Reynold Greene, 
Lawrence Greene Thomas Westrowe Nicholas Leate Hugh 
Hammersley Humph r ey Hanford? Christofer Cletherowe Robert 
Bateman Nicholas Crispe Jeffrey Kirby Henry Garraway William 
Russell Thomas Mun William Burrell Robert Salmon, William 
Stone and Humfrey Smith the present Comittees of the said 
Company and all other psons nowe free of the said Com- 
pany, All and eu r y of them all offences contempt? and act? 
heretofore done or Comitted by them or any of them against the 
said recited statute, in case where the sales so questioned or 
impeached or to be questiond or impeached, haue beene by 
whole greate sale Pack? Sack? or Cask? vngarbled as aforesaid and 
not clensed seu r ed sorted or devided and not otherwise, and all 
forfeytures losses penalties, and sornes of money w ch hath doth or 
may growe due belong or appertaine to vs our heires or successo 
for or by reason of the same act? offences and Contempt? or any 
of them, in the case aforesaid, And all accons suites informacons 
and Demaundes, whatsoeuer for touching or concerning the same 
Act? offences and contempt? and euery of them, Soe that neither 
they the said Gouerno r , and Company of merchant? of London 
trading into the East Indyes S r Thomas Smith Morrice Abbott 
William Harrison Robert Offley Robert Johnson Robert Bell 
William Holliday Reynold Greene Lawrence Greene Thomas 
Westrowe Nicholas Leate Hugh Hamersley Humfrey Handford 
Christofer Cletherowe Robert Bateman Nicholas Crispe Jeffrey 
Kirby Henry Garraway William Russell Humfrey Browne 
Thomas Munnes William Burrell Robert Salmon William Stone 
and Humfrey Smith nor any other pson being nowe free of the 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 485 

said Company or any of them shall at any time hereafter be sued 
troubled or molested for or by reason of the same offences or any 
of them in the case aforesaid. And whereas wee by our Lres 
pattentf sealed w tl1 our greate seale of England bearing date the 
one and Thirteeth daie of May in the Seaventh yeare of our 
raigne of England ffraunce and Ireland and of Scotland the Twoe 
and ffortith of our espetiall grace certen knowledge and meere 
mocon did for vs our heires and Successo" graunt vnto the 
Gouernor and Company of merchant^ of London trading into the 
East Indies and theire Successo rs , That it should and might be 
lawfull to and for the said Gouerno r and Company and theire 
Successo rs to shipp and transport out of this our Realme of 
England or the Dominions of the same in any theire voyages to 
or towardf any the partf in our said Lres pattente menconed, All 
such forraigne Coyne of Siluer or Bullion of Siluer as they should 
bring or cause to be brought into this realme of England from 
the partes beiond the Seas either in the same kind sort stamp or 
ffashion w ch it should haue when they brought it in or any other 
forme stampe or fashion to be coyned w th in our Mint w th in our 
Tower of London, at theire pleasure, Soe as the whole quanteties 
of Coyne or moneyes by them to be transported in any theire said 
voyages should not exceede the value or some of Thirtie Thousand 
poundf in any one voyadge as in and by the same Lres Pattentf 
amongest diuerse Couenantf Grauntf Powers previlidges auctho- 
rityes and other thingf therein conteyned more at large appeareth 
And whereas by our Royall pclamacon given at Whitehall the 
Three and Twentith daie of March, in the Twelueth yeere of 
our raigne of England ffraunce and Ireland, Reciting as therein 
is recited for the consideracons therein expressed, and by the 
aduise of our privie Councell, wee did publish and declaire and 
straightly chardge and comaund aswell our Trear of England 
Chancellor of our Exchequer and Warden of the Cinque portf or 
his deputy as all other our ludges Barons of our Exchequer 
Justices officers and mynisters, and more especially our Customers 
Comptrowlers and searchers, and their deputies and waighto" 
And alsoe the farmo 1 ' 3 of our Customes, in any of our Portf and 
theire Deputies or Wayters and all other our officers to whome it 
might appertaine, and all our Subiectf in Generall, That all 



486 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

Statute made and in force against exportacon of Gould or Siluer 
in Coyne lewells plate or vessell or howesoever should be 
straightly and duely kept, and observed and deligently and 
carefully prosecuted and put in execucon, vpon paine not onely of 
the Penaltyes and forfeitures, in the said Statutes or any of them 
conteyned, But alsoe of our high Indignacon and displeasure, 
and such prosecucon and Censure, as should be fitt in a cause 
of State, and alsoe vpon paine of our high indignacon, losse 
off office and other condigne Censure against such our officers 
or ministers as should be remisse or necligent in the execucon 
of our said lawes, or in the performance of that our Royall 
Comaundement : And wee did further by the said pclamacon 
straightly chardge and cornaund all Merchant^, and theire 
ffacto rs , M ra of Shippf Marriners passengers and all other our 
loving subiectf whatsoever that should haue any notice of 
Gould or Siluer, in Coine lewells Bullions plate or vessell or 
otherwise howesoever w ch had beene then exported by the space of 
Twoe yeres then last past before the date of the said proclama- 
con or should be thereafter exported or should be shipped for 
exportacon, (reasonable Charges for the voyage onely excepted) 
or should be gathered and gott togeather by change or otherwise, 
w th intent to export or w th intencon to put it into the handf of 
them w ch should export it, That the fourthwith should reveale 
the same, to our Threr of England or Vnderthfer for the time 
beinge, or to the Warden or Deputy Warden of the Cinque Portf 
to our Attorney Generall or some other or some other of our 
Learned Councell for the time beinge, ffor w ch theire discovery 
they should receiue in reward the one halfe of the said gould or 
Siluer or the value thereof, And on the other pt if they should 
not discover the same should incurr and receiue such punishment, 
as by our lawes and statutes or otherwise by our prerogatiue 
Royall should be meete to be inflicted vpon them for theire 
offence & contempt in that behalfe, as by our said proclamacon 
more at lardge appeareth. And whereas we by our Lres pattentf l 
sealed w th our greate Scale of England, bearing date at West- 
minster the ffowerteenth daie of December in the Thirteenth 
yeare of our Raigne of England ffraunce and Ireland and of 

1 See page 468. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 487 

Scotland the Nyne and ffortith, Reciting therein that wee 
beeing resolved, by all the Waies and meanes wee might, to 
further the woorthie endeavors of the said Company for the 
Continewance and enlargement of Trade into the Indies and 
other remote partf as alsoe for theire better encouragement 
therein, finding by the experience of that Trade for diuerse yeares 
then last past, That there did growe noe detriment or incon- 
venience to this our Comon Welth by such there transportacon of 
forraygne Coyne and Bullion But on the other side that an 
extradinary benefitt did growe to our kingdome through the said 
Trade by carrying out and venting the Natiue Comodities of this 
o r Realme into the Countryes and territories, of many greate and 
powerfull princes not formerly knowne or traded vnto by any of 
our subiectf w ch Tendeth to the greate Renowne and Dignity of 
our royall pson and gouernement, to the greate honour and 
enrichment of our Subiectf and State, w ch benefitt to vs and our 
subiectf 1 in greate plenty and at reasonable rates and did much 
encrease our Customes and Revenue, and the plenty of such 
forraine Comodityes was soe greate that a Staple of them begun 
to settle in this our kingdome, Soe as besides the Store w ch 
abundantly served our owne subiectf , a greate pte thereof was 
carried out into Germany Italic Turkic and other places to 
supplie the want of our neighbo re and other Countries in w ch 
Course Many greate Shippes and expert Marriners were from 
tyme to time ymployed, not onely to theire pticuler good, but 
likewise to the honor and benefitt of our kingdome in generall, 
And although wee thought it not convenient to make an excepcon 
thereof in our proclamacon, yett wee were alwayes resolued, not 
to Countermaund or restraine the said exportacon as aforesaid, 
but to continewe it by waie of reconfirming our said Lres pattentf 
with a non obstante of our said proclamacon, And therefore out 
of our princely disposicon not intending the said Company should 
receiue any preiudice by reason of our said Proclamacon or any 
thing therein Conteyned but that they should be at full liberty to 
transport such Coine and Siluer as aforesaid in such ample 
manner as they had donn might or ought to doe, by force of our 
said former royall Graunt to them in that behalfe made, and the 

1 Some words have been omitted here (cp. page 470). 



488 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

rather for that the Coyne, and Bullion of Siluer soe to be 
transported was onely of forraigne Siluer and such as should be 
by the said Company brought into this Realme or by them or any 
of them procured to be brought from the part? beiond the Seas, 
and of that, And of that also in such reasonable quantety and 
proporcon as had beene thought fitt and convenient and was in 
our Lres pattentf expressed, of our espetiall, grace certaine 
knowledge and meere mocon, did graunt and confirme, vnto the 
said Gouernor and Company of Merchant^ of London trading 
into the East Indies and theire Successors, that it should and 
might be lawfull to and for the said Gouerno r and Company and 
theire successo r8 to shipp and transport out of this our Realme of 
England or the Dominions of the same in any theire voyages to 
or towardf any the partf in our foresaid Lres pattentf menconed 
or expressed, All such forraigne Coyne of Siluer Spanish or other 
forreigne Silver or Bullion of Siluer as they had theretofore since 
the date of our said Lres pattentf bearing date the foresaid one 
and Thirtith daie of Maie in the Seaventh yeare of our raigne of 
England ffrauce and Ireland brought or caused to be brought into 
this realme of England or should at any time or times after the 
date of our said Lres pattentf bearing date the foresaid ffoure- 
teenth daie of December in the foresaid Thirteenth yeare of our 
raigne of England ffraunce and Ireland bring or cause to be 
brought into our said Realme from any the partf beiond the seas 
either in the same kind sort stamp or fashion w ch it had or should 
haue, when it was or should be brought in as aforesaid, or in any 
other forme stampe or fashion to be coyned w th in our Mint w th in 
our Tower of London at theire pleasure in as lardge and ample 
manner as they theretofore had donn or might or ought to haue 
donn or thereafter could might or ought to doe by vertue or force, 
and according to the true intent and meaninge of our said Lres 
pattentf before menconed or of any thing therein conteyned our 
said pclamacon before menconed or any Lawe Statute acte of 
Parliament pclamacon or provicon theretofore had made enacted 
sett foorth or provided or any matter or thing whatsoeu r to the 
Contrary in any wise notwithstanding, as by our said Lres 
pattentf bearing date the said ffourteenth Daie of December, 
amongest diuerse others grauntf powers aucthorities and other 
thingf therein conteyned more at lardge appeareth And Whereas 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 489 

wee are informed that by the blessingf of Almightie God the said 
Trade into the East Indies is likely still more and more to 
encrease and our said Subiectf the Gouernour and Company of 
rn r chant of London trading into the East Indies, are like w th in 
the time and Compasse of one yeare to make and sett forth 
diuerse seuerall voyages into the said East Indies, wherevpon 
some question and doubt maie arise vpon our true meaninge, 
and intent, as by the woordes of our foresaid graunt and Lfes 
pattentf , Namely whether our said Subiectf the Gouerno 1 " and 
Company of Merchant^ of London trading into the East Indyes, 
may in every of theire said voyages and at every severall time of 
setting forth of Shipp or Shippf in Trad of merchandize, vnto 
the said East Indies, carry forth the said some and quantety of 
Thirtie Thousand poundf of such forraigne Coyne of Siluer 
Spannish or other forraigne Silver or Bullion of Silver as afore- 
said, ffor avoyding of w ch Doubte and Scruple, and for more full 
declaracon of our true meaning therein wee doe hereby signifie 
and declare, And doe of our spetiall grace, certaine knowledge, 
and meere mocon for vs our heires and Successo 18 graunt vnto the 
said Gouernor and Company of merchant^ of London trading 
into the East Indies, That it shall and may be lawfull for them 
and theire Successo" yearely and eu r y yeare in all the voyages, 
w ch they shall yearely make in or vnto the said East Indies to 
shipp and transport out of our Realme of England from the partf 
beyond the Seas either in the same kinde of stampe or fashion, 
w ch it shall haue when they brought it in or any other forme 
Stampe or fashion to be coyned w th in our Mint w th in our 
Tower of London, at theire pleasure, permitting them to 
carry more or lesse of theire said Bullion or Siluer in any 
of the said yearely voyages as shall serue theire occacons, and 
shalbe thought most convenient, soe as the same doe not exceede 
the some of Threescoore thousand poundes in the whole in all 
the said voyages in any one yeare to be made as aforesaid 
accompting, and reckoning euery single Spanish Ryall, for at and 
after the value of Six pence sterling, every Spanish peece of 
Twoe Rialls for and at the value of Tweluepence sterling, Every 
peece of ffower Spanish Rialls, for and at the value of Twoe 
shilling? sterling and eu r y peece of Eight Spanish Rialls for and 
at the value of ffoure shillingf sterling any Lawe statute ordinance 



490 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

or proclamacon to the Contrary in any wise notwithstanding, 
And we doe hereby straightly charge and comaunde the said 
Gou r nour and Company of m r chant of London trading into the 
East Indies and theire Successo rs , and euery of them, That they 
shall not carry out any Coyne Silver or Bullion of Siluer, what- 
soever in all theire voyages or times of sending forthe Shippes 
into the said East Indies, in any one yeare, over and aboue the 
said quantety of Threescoore Thowsand poundf in manner and 
forme aforesaid. Allthough expresse mencon of the true yearely 
value, or Certenty of the premiss 3 or of any other guiftf or grauntf 
by vs or any of our progenito rs or predecesso to the foresaid 
gouernor & Company of m r chantc of London trading into the 
East Indies heretofore made in theis pntf is not made, or any 
statute acte ordinance Provicon Proclamacon or restrainte to the 
Contrary thereof heretofore had made ordeyned or provided or 
any other thinge cause or matter whatsoever to the Contrary in 
any wise notwithstanding In Witnes whereof wee haue caused 
theis our Lres to be made Pattentf Witnes our selfe at 
Westminster the Eleaventh day of luly in the ffourteenth yeare 
of our Raigne of England ffraunce and Ireland and of Scotland 
the Nyne and ffortith. 1 




|lGHT 2 trustie and welbeloved cozen and councellor, 
and right trustie and welbeloved Councello r wee 
greete you well, having found by experience the greate 
good that ariseth to this our kingdome spetially 
importing the aduancement of Navigacon, by reason of some 
Companyes erected for traffiquing in the East Indies Greeneland 
Muscovia and such like remote places, where fewe or none would 
aduenture to travill, before theis Companyes, were established, 

1 1616. 

2 This interesting document relates to the patent granted by James I. to Sir 
James Cunningham about November, 1617, for the establishment of a Scottish 
East India Company. As this concession promised a formidable competition with 
their trade, both the East India and Muscovy Companies bent all their efforts to 
get the patent withdrawn. In this they were successful (March, 1618), but at some 
expense, as Sir James and his associates had to be compensated for the loss of their 
expected profits. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 491 

w th such p r vilidges as were thought expedient, prohibiting all 
others whoe were not allowed by the p r vilidged vndertakers, and 
subiect to the orders appointed by them, to haue Comerce w th 
those partf, out of the earnest regard to the weale of that our 
kingdome, that it may enioy the like benefitt for good con- 
sideracons moving vs therevnto, wee are desirous that a Company 
be established likewise w th yo u , w th sole power to trafique in the 
places abouenamed in the same manner, and w th the like con- 
dicons, as were graunted in theis our kingdomes for the said 
cause, And because that S r lames Cunningham of Glegarnock 
knight hath procured sundry frindes and assosiatC of his, to 
concurre w th him for the accomplishing of the said enterprize, 
wee haue made choise of him to be gouernour of the said 
Company, willing that he should haue all the rightf and pre- 
rogatiues belonging therevnto to him his heires and assignes 
during all the time that wee or our successors, shalbe pleased to 
continewe the said Company w th in this our kingdome And that 
it shallbe lawfull for him and his associates to transport vtter vent, 
and sell all such comodities, wares or merchandizes, as by him or 
them shallbe brought home, in any kingdome that they thinke, in 
as ample manner, and as the Company of London doe or may 
doe, by vertue of theire pattent graunted vnto them, Therefore 
our pleasure is having considered the course that is taken w th in 
this our kingdome, and what by differences of Lawes and 
customes is fitt to be abstracted added or altered thereanent, 
That ymediately thereafter a Pattent be graunted for that our 
kingdome to the said S r lames and his associates, w th as lardge 
Liberty and favourable condicons, as (when yo u haue consulted 
therevpon[)] can convenyently be graunted. Soe not doubting of 
your affeccon, for the furtherance of such a good worke, wee bidd 
yo u hartely farewell, from the Courte at 

This is a true coppie of the 
Lre signed by his ma tie : to S r 
lames Cunningham of Glegarnock 
knight his heires assignes and 
associates for an East India 
Company p S r William Alexander 
Clerke of the signet for Scotland 

William Alexander 




492 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

A Lfe from the Gouernour and all the principall 

states of the Ilandf Banda called Puluway Puluroone 

and Neva sent vnto generall Keelinge and the principall 
ffactor of the English at Bantam &C 1 

|EE haue all heard even from farr Countryes, of the greate 
Loue and peace, that the king? of England hath w th 
all the world from Europe to India, even from the 
former ages vntill this present, onely the king of Eng- 
land doth helpe all the world, and hath donn noe hurt to any 
of our Religion, or doth seeke to overthrowe, our Lawe, and 
doth not by force attempt to overcome any mans kingdome 
but onely by peace and frindshipp doth seeke trade w th out 
violence, theis causes onely doe make vs to loue and affect the 
king of England, because (as yett) we haue never heard any hurt, 
that he hath donn to any Nacon. Therefore wee all desire to 
come to an agrement w th the kinge of England, because that 
nowe the Hollanders doe practize by all meanes possible to 
conquer our Country and destroy our Religion by reason whereof 
all of vs of the Island^ of Banda doe vtterly hate the very sight 
of theis Hollanders, sonnes of Whores, because they exceede in 
lying and villany and desire to overcome all mens Country by 
Trechery, Theis are the occacons whie wee soe extreamely 
hate them, Wee haue nowe therefore w th one gen r all consent, 
resolued never hereafter to trade w th them, but allwayes to 
esteeme, but allwayes to esteeme them our vtter Enimyes, 
wherefore wee all thought good to send this Lfe to gen r all 
Keeling, and the principall facto r of the English at Bantam, 
That if soe be the kinge of England out of his loue toward^ vs 
will haue a care of our Cuntry and Religion and will helpe vs 
w th Artillary powder and shott and helpe vs to recover the 
Castle of Nera, whereby wee may be able to make warrs w th the 
Hollanders, by Godf helpe all the spice, that all our Ilandf shall 
yeald, wee will onely sell to the king of England, and to noe 
other nacon in the world, wherefore if you shall please to accept 

1 This may possibly have been brought to Bantam by the ambassador who 
accompanied Sophony Cozucke to that town in September, 1615, sent by the 
Bandanese to capitulate with the chief in Bantam concerning conditions of agreement 
between themselves and the English (0. C. 324). 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 493 

of what yo ul haue here written, Wee doe all intreat to make to 
make agreement w th the king of England, that there be noe 
discontent betwixt vs even from this tyme forth for evermore* to 
the end of the world. 

And if it should soe happen, that in small matters the 
Bandanezers should giue occacon of Discontent to the English, 
or the English doe that w ch might be distastfull to the Banda- 
nezars that then w th mutuall consent like frindf they would 
beare, w th each others erro rs onely wee all desire that yo u doe not 
seeke to overthrowe our religion, and that you doe not comitt 
offence w th our Weomen, because theis Twoe onely wee are not 
able to endure, Yf therefore the king of England out of his Loue 
shall please to assiste vs, wee doe all then earnestly request that 
you would come vnto vs, w th what convenient speede may bee. 



|O 3 all to whome this present writinge shall Come to be 
seene read or heard The Gouerner and Companie 
of Merchant^ of London tradinge into the East 
Indies, send greetinge in our Lord God everlastinge 
Whereas our most gratious Soveraigne Lord lames by the grace 
commission at large of God of England Scotland ffrance and Ireland 
tSSp-Ttheife Kinge defend 1 ' of the faith &c, duely waighinge 
toSteSt**.^ and Consididringe that noe voyage or enterprize 
first giuen to Cap wherein multitude of menne of seu r all qualities 
Newport* in y e Hope. and Dispositions are to be vsed and employed, 
Can bee performed and accomplished w th hope of good successe 
except some amongst them bee sufficientlie anthorized to 
restraine and punish mutinous and disorderlie persons accord- 
inge to their desert by his Highnes Lefes patent^ bearinge date 

1 A mistake for " we " ? 2 Underlined in the original. 

3 By Letters Patent of i4th Dec., 1615 (see page 468) the Company were 
empowered to grant commissions to their commanders (under a seal expressly 
appointed for that purpose), conferring upon them power to punish offenders, &c. 
This obviated the necessity of obtaining a royal commission for this purpose for each 
voyage, as had formerly been the practice. The present document shews the form in 
which these commissions were issued. 

4 See page 442, note. 




494 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

the fourteenth daye of December in this Thirteenth yeere of his 
Raigne of England ffrance and Ireland, and of Scotland the 
Nine and fortieth, At the humble suite of the said Gouerner 
and Companye gratiouslye tenderinge the good successe of their 
voyages into the said East Indies, hath giuen and graunted vnto the 
said Gouerner and Companie full power and authoritye at all tyme 
and tymes then after to nominate Chuse and employ in any and 
every their voyages then after to bee made, one or more Captaines 
or principall Commaunders to rule and governe all and everie his 
highnes Subiectf in such voyages in due obeidience for the observ- 
inge and executinge of all such good orders and constitutions as 
the said Companie shall thinke meete to ordaine and make for the 
furtherance of such voyages and to give Comission direction and 
Instruction vnto the said Captaines and Comaunders for their 
owne Carriage as also for punnishinge of offenders in the said 
voyage, And that such Captaines and Comaunders so nominated 
Chosen and employed to goe on the said voyagf haueing 
Comission and direction from the said Gouerner and Companye 
vnder the seale of the Companie appointed for that purpose shall 
haue full power and authoritye for punnishinge offences and 
executinge of Marshall Lawe namely to Chastize Correct and 
punnish all and every such person to be emploied in such voyages 
w ch shall not giue dewe obedience, and respect towardf the said 
Captaines and principall Comaunders, or not beare them selues 
one toward C another in good order and quietnes, for avoydinge of 
any occasion that might breed quarrell or dissention amongst 
them to the hindrance of the good successe, w ch is to be hoped for 
by Godf providence in any such voyage accordinge to the qualitie 
of their offences w th such punishing as are comonlye vsed in all 
Armyes at sea when they are not Capitall, and for Capitall 
offences as wilfull murther and mutinye w ch may tend to the 
overthrowe of such a voyage the same beeing iustly and truely 
proued against any the person or persons aforesaid to vse and put 
in execution the Law Called Marshall Law, And neu r theless by 
the verdict of twelue of the Companie sworne therevnto for the 
tryall of such offenders, as to such a case appertaineth And the 
said Lefes patentf to bee a warrant, and discharge for the 
doeinge of all and everie the premisses ; His Maiestye thereby 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 495 

strictly charginge and Comaunding the said Captaines or principall 
Commaund rs so to bee Chosen and employed to followe and 
punctuallie to obserue in all thingf such Comission instruction 
and directions, as they shall receaue from the said Gouerner, and 
Company vnder the foresaid scale and in noe wise to Contrarie 
the same as they will answeare the Contrary at their perrills, 
And his Ma tie by the said Leres patent^ doth strictly Charge and 
Comaund the said Gouerner and Companye and all Captaines 
and Principall Commaunders by them to bee employed in such 
voyages that whether in their voyages outward or homeward 
or in any Countrey Hand Port or Place where they shall abyde 
or Comme duringe the tyme of their beeinge abroad out of his 
Highnes kingdomes or dominions where they meete w th any the 
Subiectf of the Kinge of Spaine or of any other his Highnes 
Confederate, ffriendf or Allies, or of any other Nation or people 
their shippes vessils Good or M r chandizes, they doe not attempt 
or goe about to sett vppon take or surprize their persons shippes 
vessels Goodf or Merchandizes or offer any Iniurye or discur- 
tezie vnto them except they shall bee by them first therevnto 
iustlye prouoked, either in the iust defence of their owne persons 
shippes vessels Goodf or Merchandize, [ l or offer any Iniurye or 
discurtezie vnto them, except they shalbee by them first therevnto 
iustly prouoked either in the iust defence of their owne persons 
shippes vessells Goodf or M^handizes] 1 by any their disturbance 
or hindrance whatsoeuer in their quiett Course of Trade, or for 
recompence and recou r ie of the persons shippes goodf or M r chan- 
dize of any his highnes subiectf, that haue bene allready in or 
neere the East Indie [s] or for any other iust cause of their defence 
or recompence of Losses sustayned In w ch cases so excepted, 
yf the said Captaines or principall Comaunders or any others 
vnder their goverment shall attempt surprize or take the psons 
shippes and Goodf of anie Prince or State by whose Subiectf 
they shall sustaine any wronge or losse in manner as aforesaid 
the said Gou r ner and Companie or their Captaines and 
Cornaund rs shall not for any such Act or Actf grounded vppon 
the occasions menconed bee in daunger or subiect to the perill 

1 These brackets have apparently been inserted in the MS. by someone who had 
noticed the duplication of this passage. 



4 g6 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

or penalties of his highnes Lawes as in and by the said Lefes 
patent^ more at large may appeare : Nowe knowe yee that 
wee the said Gou r ner and Companie of M r chant^ of London 
Tradinge vnto the East Indies Intendinge by the helpe and 
assistance of Almightie God this instant month of 
to sett out a voyage of shippes sufficiently victualed 

manned and fraught w th nV'chandize to goe in Course of 
Trade into the said East Indies haue out of the good opinion w ch 
wee hold and Conceyue of 21 IS his experience Judgment Skill and 
discretion in matters of Trade and Nauigation and of his abilitie 
and wisdome to gouerne and direct so great a fleete of 1 Shippes 
and number of men to bee therein employed and of his care dili- 
gence and faithfulnes about the same haue nominated chosen and 
appointed the said & 13 to bee Captaine and principall Gou'ner 1 in 
the said voyage of the said shippes and persons, And accordinge 
to the said power to vs viven 2 by the said Leres Patent doe hereby 
giue warrant & auch[thority] to the said 21. $3. to doe execute 
and perfourme all and eu r ye thinge w ch to the place and office of a 
Captaine and a principall 1 Comaunder appertaineth as well in 
punnishing and Correctinge of offenders in all kindf in and 
duringe the tyme of the said voyage, as also for the iust and 
lawefull defence of the said persons Shippes goodf and M r chan- 
dizes against the offence vyolence and Iniurye of Enemyes 
or evill disposed persons as also for the recoveringe backe and 
getting recompence for all losses wrongfullie receiued or 
sustained by any such meanes as aforesaid, And likewise for 
doeing and performeing such other matters thinges direccons 
and Comaundementf w ch hee the said & 13 doth or shall 
herew th receive in charge by writinge from the said Gou r n r 
and Company touchinge the said voyage or the busines 
thereof, So as the said H $$ in doeinge and executinge the 
p r misses doe in all thinges followe and obay his Ma tics will 
and direccons heerein before expressed to bee conteyned in the 
said recited LeFes Patentf, and such orders and Constitutions 
as the said Gouerner and Companie haue made ordeyned and 

1 These words in italics are underlined in the original. 

2 A mistake for " given." 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 497 

sett in writinge vnder their Scale and herew th deliu r ed to the 
said E ^ and not otherwise And whereas his Ma tie by his leres 
Patent? bearing date the 3i th day of May in the 7 th yeare of 
his highnes raigne of England France and Ireland and of Scotland 
the 42 th Hath further bene graciouslye pleased streightlye to 
charge, and prohibite all his Subiect? of what condicon soeu r , 
To trade visite or frequent into the said East Indies, or into any 
of the Island? or Port? thereof, vppon peine and forfeicture not 
onely of their good? and M r chandizes, but also of their shippes 
and furniture thereof. Now knowe yee. That wee the said Gou r 
and Comp me aforesaid, by the lyke power to vs given by the said 
Leres Patent?, doe hereby giue warrant and aucthortie vnto the 
said that if in his voyage outward or homeward, hee 

shall meete w th any of the shippes or good? or any of his Ma ti8 
Subiect? (other then such as are set out by our appointment [)], 
To arrest, take and seize the persons Shippes and good? of all 
such offenders and to deteyne them in his Custodye, and bringe 
them saufelye back into England w th him ; here to answear such 
matters as shalbe obiected against them for doeing contrarye to 
his Highnes Comaundm*, expressed more largely in his said lere> 
patent? 

In Wittnes whereof The said Gou r ner and Companie haue 
herevnto putt their Scale thearevnto appointed the day of 
in the yeare &c. 



jO 1 all to whome theise present? shall Come to bee 
scene read or heard, The Gou r ner and Company 
of the Merchant? of London tradinge to the East 
Indies send greetinge, whearas o r Soveraigne Lord 
the King? Ma tie by his Leres Patent? vnder the greate Seale of 
England made and dated the fourteenth day of december in the 

1 The preceding document (see note) is a specimen of the commission issued to 
the commander of the Company's fleet ; the present one appears to shew the form 
adopted for the captains of the separate vessels. 

I L 




4Q3 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

thirteenth yeere of his Raigne over this Realme of England 
Hath graunted to vs the said Governer and Companye full power 
and auchthoritye at all tymes then after to nominate and ymploy 
in every of o r voyages then after to bee made into the said East 
Indies, One or more Captaynes or Principall Comaund rs to rule 
and governe his Ma ties subiectf in such voyages in dewe obeidience 
for the observinge and executinge of all such Orders and Consti- 
tucons as wee the said Gou r ner and Companie shall thinke fitt 
to make and ordayne for the furthrance of such vyage His 
Ma tie thereby streightly Chargeinge and Coniaundinge the said 
Captayne and Principall Gou r n rs so to bee ymployed to follow 
and punctually to obserue in all thinges such Commission 
Instruction and directions, as they shall receive from the said 
Governer and Companie and in no wise to contrarie the same 
as they will answeare the contrary at their perills. Now know 
yee That wee the said Governer and Companie tradinge to the 
East Indies intendinge by the assistance of Allmightie God this 
present Month of to sett out one or more Shippes suffi- 

ciently victualled manned and laden with Merchandizes to goe 
in Course of Tradinge into the said East Indies out of the 
good opynion w ch wee hould and Conceyve of 1 %$ have Chosen 
and appoynted the said & 1$ to bee chief Comaunder and 
principall Governer in the said voyage of the good Shippe 
Called the. And according to the power to vs given by 

his Ma ties said Lefes Patent^ doe hereby give warrant and 
auchthoritie to the said & 13 and to such other person and 
persons w ch duringe the said voyage vppon or after the 
death or removall of the said & $3 the said Companye haue 
named and appoynted to bee Captaine or principall Corn- 
maunder of the said Shippe to doe execute and performe all 
and every thinge w ch to the place and office of a Captaine or 
principall Commaunder appertaineth, accordirge to the Direc- 
tions and Commaundm* w ch the said & is? hath or shall herew th 
receiue in Charge by writinge from vs the said Gouerner and 
Companie touching the said voyage, and the busines therof. So 
as the said & 13 and such other person or persons w ch shall 
succeede in his roome as aforesaid in doeinge and executinge of 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 499 

the premisses doe in all thinges followe and obey such ord rs and 
Constitucons as wee the said Gouerner and Companie haue made 
ordayned and sett in writinge and herew th delivered to the said 
& $$ and not otherwise In witnesse whereof wee the said 
Governer and Companie have herevnto put our Scale the 
day of in the yeares &c. 



lames Rex 1 

jIGHT trustie, and right welbeloued Counsaylor wee 
greet yow well ; These are to will and require yow 
forthwith to deliuer to our trustie, and welbeeloued 
S r . Thomas Smith Knight Gouernor of the East Indya 
Companye of Merchant^, or to any whome hee shall apoynt, one 
Brass Demye Culueringe of ffiue and twentie hundred weight or 
thereabout^ 5 ; to be presented in our name to the Kinge of 
Macassar in the East Indyes, from whome wee haue receyued 
manye present^ of farr greater value heretofore. And for your soe 
doeinge, this shall bee your warrant. Geuen vnder our Signet at 
Whitehall this 13*. of January 1616. 

To our right trustie and right welbeeloued Counsayler 
the Lo : Carew 2 M r of our Ordinance 



1 This letter explains itself. There is no reference to the matter in the Court 
Minutes. 

2 George Carew, Baron Carew of Clopton, and afterwards Earl of Totnes (b. 1555, 
d. 1629), was a fine example of the many sidedness which characterized the men of his 
day. He had made a voyage with Sir Humphrey Gilbert, and had held a captaincy 
in the royal navy; as Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance, he had taken part in 
Essex's expeditions to Cadiz and to the Azores; he had been for a short period 
ambassador in France ; he had rendered most important services in Ireland, both in 
a military capacity and in administrative posts; as a courtier, he had the good 
fortune to enjoy the favour of three successive occupants of the throne ; and he is 
still remembered with gratitude by students for his extensive collection of documents 
bearing on Irish history, a subject in which he took the liveliest interest. He was 
appointed Master of the Ordnance on the 26th June, 1608, and held the post until 
the 5th May, 1617 (see Diet, of National Biography, s. n.). 




500 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

[AMES 1 by the grace of God Kinge of England Scotland 
ffraunce and Ireland defender of the faith &c, TO 
the Treasourer Chauncellor Vnderthrer and Barons 
of our Exchequer for the tyme being. To the 
Warden of the Cinque Fortes, or his deputy for the tyme 
being. To all our Judges for the tyme being, to our 
Attorney generall, and the rest of our learned Counsell, for the 
tyme being. To all our Justices, Officers and Ministers for the 
tyme being. To all Customers Comptrollers, ffarmors of 
Customes. Searchers and Wayters in any of our Fortes for the 
tyme being. And to all the Officers Ministers and Subiectf of vs 
and our Heires and Successors for the tyme being ; to whome it 
shall or may appertaine, Greeting ; WHEREAS we by our Ires 
Patent^ sealed with our greate Seale of England bearing date the 
one and thirtith day of May in the seaventh yeare of our Raigne 
of England ffraunce and Ireland . and of Scotland the two and 
fortith. Of our espetiall grace certaine knowledge and meere 
motion did for vs our heires and Successors graunt vnto the 
Gouernor and Companie of M r chantt of London trading into the 
East Indies and their Successors. That it should and might be 
lawfull to and for the said Gou r & Companye and theire Succes- 
sors to shipp and transport out of this our Realme of England or 
the dominions of the same in any theire voyages to or toward^ 
any 

[The rest is wanting] 



1 It is difficult to assign a date or subject to this fragment, but there seems to be 
some reason for concluding it to belong to the Royal Grant of i6th January, 1617/18, 
by which the Company were empowered to export foreign coin to the value of 
loo.ooo/. yearly [see Shaw's Charters of the East India Company (Madras, 1887), page 
287, and a reference in No. 6 of the charters calendared on page 263 of a Report on 
the old Records of the India Office (W. H. Allen & Co., 1891)]. A copy of the petition 
leading up to this grant is preserved among the records at the India Office 
(B.R., FF, III, 16), but of the document itself no ccpy can be traced. 




THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 501 

Condicons l propounded and agreed vppon the fifth 
of May 1618 betwixt the Gouern 1 and Companie of 
M r chV of London trading into the East Indyes on thone 
part and George Hall of Deptford Stroud in the Countye 
of Kent Ancho r smith on thother parte 

I HAT George Hall shall whollie employe himselfe in the 
Companies busines, and not to meddle w th any other 
mens w th out leave first had from the Companie in 
writing nor keepe any other Shopp or Shoppes in the 
Towne or else where. 

That the said George Hall shall not make any Ironworke 
whatsoeu 1 ' (as Anchors, boultf Ring boult, Carriage worke, 
Ruther Irons, Pumpe chaines, Plates &c) w th out order from the 
Companie or their Deputyes, and to receaue direccons from them 
both for the waight and sizes And if that any such worke being 
made, shall not be approued of, it shall then be returned backe 
againe vnto the said George Hall, who shall make all his worke 
as is said according to direccon for the sizes and waight by the 
patterne and noe otherwise Nor that Bradshowe receaue any Iron 
worke made but such as he shall first acquaint, M r Burrell w th all, 
to be according to the said direccon. 

That the said George Hall, shall not alter nor change, any of 
the said Iron that is laid in by the Companie for their vse about 
any other mens workf , but onely for the Companies seruice nor 
to carrye away or wast any of the Companies coales, but to cause 
them to be spent onelye about their busines. And shall worke 
noe other Iron then such as he shall receaue from the Companie. 

And that the said George Hall, shalbe answerable in accompt 
for all such Iron and coales as shalbe deliu r ed to him from the 
Companie according to the direccon given by the M r of the 

worke. 

And for the prices of eu r ye pticuler sort of Iron worke, the said 
Gouernor and Companie doe cou n en[t] to paie vnto the said 

1 This agreement is entered on the Court Minutes, under date sth May, 1618. 



502 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF 

George Hall as followeth being according to a former agreem* 
made w th lohn Martyn, the 17 th of October 1615. 

li s d 

ffor Anchors from ... 100 to iooo wt i 10 o p Cent 

ffor Anchors from ... 1000 to 2000 i 13 o p Cent 

ffor Anchors from ... 2000 & vpwardf ... i 15 op Cent 

ffor Ruther Irons and Pumpe chaines o o 4 p pound 

Boate Hookes and Leech hookf o i 4 p peece 

GromettC and Staples poz 4 1 p doss x o 2 op doss 

Muskett Hookc o o 2 2 p peece 

Carriage fore lockff o o 2p peece 

Shutting of ould boultf o o 2 p shut 

Boate Ruther Irons o 4 o p paire 

Stiffe 3 Ruther Irons o 3 4 p paire 

Pinchers of all sortf well steeled o o 5 p pound 

Murthering peeces standing to tryall o o 5 p pound 




|HE 4 order of Accomptf to be kept by Richard Mountney 
Husband for the Companie of M r chantf of London 
trading to theast Indies, together w th Certayne other 
diligences to be obserued by the said Husband for the 
ffaithfull and plaine effecting of those Affayres w ch haue byn and 
hereafter shalbe Comitted to his Charge by the Gouernor 
Deputye and Comittees for the said Companie concerning the 
second loynt Stock. 

r ffirst fforasmuch as heretofore yo u haue not kept the 
accomptf of the said Companie in such order and fforme as we 
expected, and is nee [d] full to be vsed in a busines of soe great trust, 
and consequence. Wee doe therfore order and appoint yo u , for 
the Reformacon of that w ch is alreadye pas [t] and for the better 

1 Dozen ? * 3 in the copy entered on the Court Minutes. 3 Or "sciffe" ? 

4 These instructions were drawn up at a Court held loth December, 1619, and 
will be found entered upon the minutes under that date. For a note on Richard 
Mountney see page 304. 



THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 503 

Informacon of the said Companie in tyme to come That yo u 
fforthw th prepare and keepe the said acco^ orderly in a ffayre 
lornall and lidger 

2 And yo u shall Intitle the said bookf in the name and for 
the vse of the said Companye 

3 And in the begining of the said lornall yo u shall sett 
downe by way of Inventarie all and eu r ye pticuler Comodityes, 
Stores, pvisions, some and somes of money or victualls w ch did 
Remayne in yo r Charge apptayning vnto the ffirst loynt Stocke, 
and are sithence transferred vnto the vse of the second loynt 
Stocke. 

4 And yo n shall keepe an acco* of all and euerye pticuler 
some and somes of money w ch yo u haue or shall receaue by 
warrant of the Tresorer, or of any other pson by w* meanes 
soeuer for and to the vse of the said Companie 

5 And yo u shall keepe seu r all Acco*C for each Comodityes, 
Stores pvisions or victualls w ch yo u haue or shall hereafter puide 
and buy to Ishew forth to the shippes of the said Companie, or to 
ther yardf, or in whatsoeuer other mannor to their vses 

6 And forasmuch as their doeth pase thoroughe yo r handf 
many pettye matters in pvisions of smale valewe, w ch cannot 
require nor easilye be accommodated into seu r all accomptf , yo u 
shall therfore keepe one accompt for them all, vnder the name of 
pettye pvisions, and in yo r lornall yo u shall sett downe all the 
pticulers, w ch being Colected into grosse somes yo u may the 
more easilye pase the pcells into yo r Lidger. 

7 And wheras yo u doe often receaue many thingf of great 
valew for the w ch yo u make noe disborsm* but haue onely the 
Custodie or charge to receaue, and Ishew them to the vse of the 
Comp & As namely the Comodityes bought by the Comittees w ch 
yo u receaue by waight Measure or number, to shippe forth. And 
alsoe many pvisions, Stores, and victualls w ch haue byn and 
hereafter may be retorned home in the Shipps of the ffirst and 
second loyn Stocke ; yo u shall therfore bringe all the said thingf 



504 FIRST LETTER BOOK OF THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 

whatsoeu r vnto the aboue written acc^. wherby the Companie 
may at all tymes plainely, knowe and .pceaue in what manno r yo u 
haue, Ishewed fforth ther said Goodf . 

8 And yo u shall take a bill of pcells subscribed by the partyes 
of whome you buy any thinge for the said Companie. ffor in the 
Auditt of yo r accomptf that shalbe required of yo u to vouche the 
pcell. 

9 And yo u shall not furnish nor lade anything wha[t]soeu r in 
the Companies Shippes or yardf or otherwise w th out Receaptf 
from those seu r all officers, whome that shall concerne to Receaue 
and to be accomptable for the same, for in the Auditt of yo r 
accompt yo u shall not be discharged w th out the said receaptf?. 

10 Lastlye yo u shall vse diligence and prepare all the said 
bookf to be Audited once eu r ye moneth at the least. And yo u 
shall haue a speciall care and inspection to those officers who are 
employed vnder yo u in the Affayres of the said Companie that 
they be skilfull true and ffaithfull in their seu r all placf and 
employment^. 




INDEX. 



NOTE. The letter n shows that the reference is to a footnote. 



George, Archbishop 
of Canterbury, 164 n 
Abbott, Sir Maurice, 164, 
275, 43472, 484; notice of, 164 n 

Abbott, Robert, Bishop of Salisbury, 
164 n 

Accounts, instructions to Richard 
Mountney for the keeping- of the 
Company's, 502 

Acheen, 38, 65 n, 120, 228 n, 249, 254 ; 
privileges granted to the Company 
by the king of, 69, 264, 265, 321 

Adams, William, 398 n, 412 ; notice of, 
412 n 

Adderley, William, 275 

Aden, 103 , 104, 125, 126, 154,217, 
219, 227/2, 251, 308, 311, 320, 322, 
334,340, 341, 346, 403, 410, 436; 
draft of safe conduct for trade at, 
266 ; factors to be left at, 123, 250 ; 
a garrison town, 246, 247 n ; letters 
from James I. to governor of, 106, 
231, 232, 354, 394; information to 
be collected relative to, 255 ; instruc- 
tions for opening up trade at, 119, 
248 ; safe conduct from the Grand 
Signior for trade at, 434 

Admiralty, Court of, 193, 195 ; attach- 
ment made by, upon certain goods, 
25 ; action by the Company against 
Sir E. Michelborne in, 135 n ; 
warrant to apprehend deserters, 1 10; 
applied for, 209 

Adrianus Junius : Nomenclator of, re- 
ferred to, 200 n 

Adventure, bills of: form of, for the 
Third Voyage, 274 ; form of, for 
the Fourth Voyage, 273 ; to under- 



adventurers in the Fourth Voyage, 
271, 272; to Phillip de Graeffe, 239, 
269 ; names of persons to whom 
bills were granted for the Third 
Voyage, 275 ; for the Fourth Voyage, 
294 

Adventurers: defaulting, i, 9, n, 12, 
18; may be disfranchised in event 
of non-payment of subscriptions, 
185; subscriptions of, 160; names 
of the first, 164-166; in the Third 
Voyage, 275 ; in the Fourth Voyage, 
294 ; warrant summoning defaulters 
to bring in their arrears of contribu- 
tion at once, 18 

Agra, 126 n, 228 n, 23311, 235 n, 247 n, 
252, 263 n, 459, 461; Steel's pro- 
posed waterworks at, 458 n, 460 

Agreement of the Company with the 
porters, 88 ; with the wharfinger, 
89 ; memorandum of, with the far- 
mers of His Majesty's Customs, 155 ; 
with Edmond and George Scott to 
refer a dispute to arbitration, 293 ; 
with Peter Floris and Lucas Anthe- 
umis for the management of the 
Seventh Voyage, 363 ; with Sir 
Thomas Roe, appointed Ambas- 
sador to the Great Mogul, 446 ; 
with George Hall for the supply of 
iron-work, anchors, &c., &c., 501 

Ahmedabad, 461 

Ai, Pulo, 73 n 

Akbar, the Emperor, 103, 247 n, 252 

Albertus, loow 

Albony, William, 275 

Aldersey, William, 165 

Aldworth, Thomas, commission granted 
I M 



506 



INDEX. 



to, by James I. for the Tenth Voyage, 
437 ; notice of, 437 n 

Aleppo, 120, 122, 249, 250, 309, 320; 
Barth. Huggett consul at, 19 n 

Alexander, Sir William, 491 

Alexandria, letters to be sent to Eng- 
land through persons at, 250 

Algiers, 122, 250 

Allabaster, Thomas, 19 n, 32 n, 164, 
169 

Allasackatrina (Socotra), 82 

Allen, Edward, 295 

Allen, Gregory, 166 

Allen, Ralph, 40, 166, 275 

Allen, Richard, consul at Algiers, 122, 
250 

Allen, William, 275 

Almonds, 199,480 

Aloes, 312 ; private trade in, for- 
bidden, 128, 258, 299; Socotrina, 
82 n, 119, 246, 333, 402 

Aloes, Lignum, 337, 340, 406, 410, 427, 
428 

Amber, 255 

Ambergris, 81, 119, 245, 246; private 
trade in, forbidden, 58, 128, 258, 299 

Amboyna, 66, 68, 76, 77 ; description 
of, 74, 264, 265 ; English and Dutch 
commodities to be sold there, 76 ; 
massacre of, 33 n, 93 n ; weights of, 
80 

Ammoniac, see Sal ammoniac 

Amsterdam, 151 ; letter from Mr. 
Robert Middleton to certain Burgo- 
masters at, 432 ; reply, 434 

Anchors, price to be paid for, 502 

Anderson, Dr. John, 425 n ; his Early 
English Intercourse -with Siam re- 
ferred to, 428 n 

Angell, William, 165, 275 

Angola, 428 

Aniseeds, 199, 480 

Antheumis, Lucas, 364-369, 371-375, 
379-388, 421, 424-426; agreement 
with, for the Seventh Voyage, 363 ; 
notice of, 363 n ; and Peter Floris, 
plans of, for the Seventh Voyage, 
427 
Antony and Cleopatra, quotation from, 

38 n 

Anwen, 73 
Aquavitae, 101, 102 
Arabia, 126 n, 235 n, 325, 342, 411 
Archer, Henry, 275 
Armeway, Ambrose, 399 
Armitage, Samuel, 165, 275 



Arrian's Periplus of the Red Sea re- 
ferred to, 59 n 

Artatten, or Ortattan, 73 

Assention, ship, 7 n, 8, 27, 48 n, 51 n, 
52 n, 56, 57, 62, 63, 87 n, 124, 134 n, 
148, 196, 220, 227 n, 233 n, 235 n, 
237, 239 n, 240, 263 n, 272, 273,313, 
316, 419, 430; wreck of, 228 n 

Atkinson, Richard, 273, 294, 304 ; 
notice of, 294 n 

Attare, 201 n 

Azars (cloths), 97 

Babylon, 126 n 

Backhowse, Rowland, 164, 276 

Backhowse, Samuel, 164 

Baftas (piece-goods), 73, 74, 77-79 

Bagdad, 235 n 

Bahrein, 458; Islands, pearl fishery of / 
the, 325 n 

Baker, Thomas : employed in victual- 
ling the ships for the First Voyage, 1 1 

Balas or spinel ruby, the, 58 n 

Bale mark, the Company's, 365 

Balemboa, 429 

Balhara, 287 n 

Ball, Baylie, 326, 327 

Ball, George, 399 ; notice of, 399 n 

Ball (or Bull), Richard, 165, 276 

Ballabi, 287 n 

Bancks, John, 276, 295 

Banda, 33, 34, 48 n, 60-62, 65, 66, 74, 
77, 78, 126, 131, 153, 286, 288 n, 289- 
291, 298, 301, 335, 338-343. 346, 347. 
404, 407-411, 430, 431 ; description 
of, 73, 264, 265 ; Dutch stop English 
trade at, 431 ; English commodities 
in demand there, 73 ; factors' accounts 
at, 339, 340; factory to be settled at, 
129, 259; Lancaster's instructions 
for a voyage to, 33 ; letter from the 
States of, soliciting assistance against 
the Dutch, 492 ; present for the 
governor, in the Sixth Voyage, 339 ; 
weights of, 80 
Bandon, 425 

Bandris, conjectural position of, 425 n; 
governor of, letter from James I. to 
the, 425 

Banning, Andrew, 164 

Banning, Paul, 164, 169, 186, 275; 

letter to, and others, 9; notice of, 9 n 

Bantam, 33 n, 34, 34 n, 36, 38, 39 n, 

40, 47 n, 48 n, 52 n, 56, 57, 60, 

64-66, 73, 74, 76, 78-80, 84, 86, 

92 n, 95, 95 n, 96, in n, 120, 124, 



INDEX. 



507 



126, 129, 131, 132, 134 n, 135 n, 136, 
138, 153, 213, 222 n, 228 n, 233 n, 
248, 249, 251, 254, 256, 262, 290, 
291, 298, 303, 311, 318 , 326 n, 
335. 338-343. 386, 387, 399 n, 404, 
407-411, 412 , 414, 417, 418, 420, 
427-430, 459, 463 n ; accounts of 
the Third and Fourth Voyages 
to be kept separate, 238; of the 
Fifth Voyage to be kept separate, 
291 ; bad keeping of accounts at, 

312 ; corruption and private trading 
among Company's servants at, 95 n ; 
dealings of the factors at, to be 
examined, 303 ; disposal of old cloth 
left at, 300 ; Dutch friendship to be 
sought, 93 ; employment of native 
craft in collecting spices, &c., for 
transfer to the Company's ships, 
289 ; establishment at, to be re- 
duced, 133 ; factors at, to procure 
Chinese silks, 260, 301 ; first voyage 
of the Dutch to, 429 ; goods left at, 
in the First Voyage, 58, 59 ; house 
to be built at, 34 ; Lancaster's in- 
structions to the factors left at, 33 ; 
king of, letters from James I. to the, 
46, 352, 392, 423 ; letter sent to the 
factors at, in the Third Voyage, 
147 ; in the Fifth Voyage, 285 ; 
in the SixthVoyage, 312 ; letter from 
the Company to William Keel- 
ing, or the other factors at, 236 ; 
Middleton's instructions for Gabriel 
Towerson and others at, 91 ; presents 
to be given to the great personages 
at, 133, 262 ; prevalence of fires at, 
91 n ; private trade at, forbidden, 

313 ; short weight, and bad con- 
dition, of spices, &c., received from, 
148 ; wages to be paid the factors 
and others left at, 94 

Barbar, Thomas, 276 

Barbary, Coast of, 428 

Barber, Mr., 308 

Barberry, 201, 480 

Barkeley, Mr., 399 n 

Barker, Edward, 164 

Barker, Francis, 166 

Barkham, Edward, 276 

Barnes, Bartholomew, 164 

Barnestey (or Barnesley), Nicholas, 

165, 276 
Baroach, 460 

Barrett, Richard, 164, 276 
Barrett, William, 19 



Barricoes, 101 n, 102 

Barwicke, Thomas, 399 

Bases, 78 

Basse, Humphrey, 166, 276, 294 

Bassora, 164 n 

Batan (port in Persia), 458 

Bate, John, 18 n, 19 

Bateman, Robert, 165, 276, 484 

Batten, Mr., 126 

Battery, 457 

Bayly, Robert, 166 

Beads, 81 

Beale, Richard, 166, 276, 295 

Bell, Robert, 165, 169, 276, 292, 294, 

328 n, 347 n, 484 
Bemunde, John, 94 
Bengal, 73, 75. 79, 81, 85, 131, 261 ; 

wares to be traded in, 85 ; Bay of, 

369, 380, 427 
Benjamin, 255, 289, 312, 337, 338, 

340, 406, 408, 410, 427,428 ; private 

trade in, forbidden, 58, 128, 258, 

299 

Bennett, George, 101, 276, 295 
Berblocke, William, 276, 294 
Berry, Henry, letters to be sent 

through, at Marseilles, 320 
Best, Thomas, commission granted 

to, by James I. for the Tenth Voyage, 

437 ; special authority from James I. 

to negotiate a treaty with the Great 

Mogul, 441 ; notice of, 437 n 
Beverley, 268 
Bezoar stones, 67, 77, 84, 103, 108, 131, 

150, 255, 261, 287 ; how to test, 83 ; 

private trade in, forbidden, 58, 300 
Bhavanagar, 287 n 
Bills of adventure, see Adventure, 

bills of 

Binny Pepper, 199 
Birdwood's Report on the Old Records 

of the India Office referred to, 24 n, 

Soon 

Blatty (piece goods), 79 
Boats, 371, 381 
Boeroe, 78 n 
Boeton or Buton, description of, 77, 264, 

265 ; English commodities in demand 

at, 78 ; slaves to be had at, 77 
Bond, William, 165, 276 
Bonds, forms of, entered into by the 

commanders and others, for the 

Third Voyage, 140^, 145-147; for 

the Fourth Voyage, 220, 222-224 
Bonham, Edmond, 114 
Bonham, William, 166, 276, 295; 
I M I 



INDEX. 



draft bill of adventure to, for the 
Fourth Voyage, 271 

Book of Martyrs sent to the Indies, 
419 

Books sent out to the Indies, 419 

Boothby, Henry, 328 

Boothby, Thomas, 165, 276 

Borax, private trade in, forbidden, 58 

Borne Laya (piece goods), 79 

Borneo, 287 n, 288 n 

Bostocke, Thomas, 165, 276 

Bourne, Richard, 276 

Bowles, George, 165, 276 

Bowyer, Robert, 18 n, 19 

Bradshaw, Mr., 501 

Bradshaw (or Broadshawe), .Samuel, 
Bond entered into by, for the Fourth 
Voyage, 222 ; notice of, 222 n 

Bramley, Thomas, 32, 46 ; notice of, 
32 n 

Brass cannon, breech-loading, mention 
of, 73. ?8 

Brazil wood, 61 n 

Brest, 466 n 

Bridgman, Henry, 165, 276, 295 ; 
bill of adventure granted by, to 
Nicholas Skinner, on account of the 
Fourth Voyage, 272 

Brittany, loss of the Union off the 
coast of, 222 w, 228 n 

Broad cloths, 462 

Broadshawe, Samuel, see Bradshaw 

Broadsword blades, 74 

Broken Wharf, 460 

Brooke, John, 166, 276, 294 

Brooke, Robert, 165, 276 

Browne, Humphrey, 484 

Browne, Robert, 52, 56, 91, 92, 94, 
147, 148, 286, 287, 312, 362-364, 369, 
371-375, 379-382, 385-388,421, 424- 
426 ; his churlish dealings with the 
natives, 131 ; notice of, 52 n 

Browne, Thomas, 80, 86 

Bruce's Annals referred to, 19 n 

Brund, William, 7 ; notice of, 7 n 

Bucke, Francis, 219^,276,316; letter 
to, relative to his release from prison 
at Lisbon, 306 

Bucke, Robert, 166, 276 

Buckhurst, Lord (afterwards Earl of 
Dorset), 12 n, 28, 31 n, 44, 155, 206, 
217; correspondence with, relative 
to the sale of pepper, 27-32, 42-45 ; 
petition to, 212 ; warrant from, n 

Buffaloes, 81, 82 

Bull, Richard, see Ball, Richard 



Bulmer, Bevis, 460 n 

Burrell (or Barret or Burret), Richard, 

165, 276, 294 
Burrell (or Barret or Burret), William, 

165, 276, 484 
Burrell, Mr., 501 

Busbridge, John, 165, 276, 292, 294 
Busby, Ralph, 165, 276 
Butlar, Henry, 276 

Csesar, Sir Julius, 195 ; letter from, to 
the Company, 25 ; notice of, 25 n 

Cage, Nicholas, 276 

Cairo, 120, 249, 308, 309, 311 ; letters 
to be sent through the French consul 
at, 320 

Calambac, 428 

Calamus, 201, 480 

Calcutta Review, June, 1857, referred 
to, 446 n 

Calendar of State Papers, Domestic, 
Addenda, 1580-1625, referred to, 
105 n ; 1603-1610, referred to, 228 n 

Calendar of State Papers, E. Indies, 
1513-1616, referred to, 32 n, 69 n, 
ill n, 120 n, 196 n, 210 n, 219 n, 
222 n, 224 n, 356 n, 359 n, 396 n, 
429 n, 449 n, 468 n, 479 n 

Calicoes, 59, 60, 74 n, 81, 84, 126, 131, 
150, 247 n, 252, 255, 256, 261, 309, 
337-340, 405, 407-410,461; private 
trade in, forbidden, 128, 258, 299 

Calicut, 83, 84, 104, 105 ; cloth, 74 ; 
letter from James I. to the king of, 
231, 232 

Calivers, 288 

Cambay, 73, 75, 82, 103 n, 121, 123, 
124, 134 n, 137, 153, 154, 219, 228 n, 
247 n, 249, 251-253, 287,316, 321, 
346, 417, 441 ; ivory in demand at, 
119, 245 ; " Commander " of, letters 
from James I. to the, 349, 350, 389, 

391 

Cambayans, 460 

Cambell, Sir Thomas, 164, 190, 191, 
276 ; notice of, 160 n 

Cambella, 76 

Cam den, Edward, 399 

Camphor, 289 ; private trade in, for- 
bidden, 58 

Campion, Mr., 100 

Cananore, 82, 83 

Canton, 286 n 

Canvas, surplus, may be sold, 257 

Cape of Good Hope, 134 n, 136, 158, 
160, 174, 273, 274, 429 



INDEX. 



509 



Caps, red, 334, 335 

Caraway seeds, 201, 480 

Cardamoms, 201 n 

Carew, the Lord, 499 ; notice of, 499 n 

Carill, Robert, 164 

Carleile, Geoffrey, 309 

Carmichael, Sir Hugh, 105 n 

Carpenter, Thomas, 277 

Carpenters, letter requesting punish- 
ment of two, for non-fulfilment of 
agreement, 307 

Carpets, 459 ; Persian, 463 

Carrack, a Portuguese, taken, 430 

Casa (lawns), 131, 261 

Caspian Sea, 320 

Cassia fistula, 200, 480 

Cassia lignum, 201, 480 

Casson (or Cason), John, 166, 276 

Cataya or Cathay (China), 23, 24 n, 
134 n, 159, 190, 191 

Cater, George, 165 

Cater, William, 165, 276, 292, 294 

Catty, a Chinese weight, 80 

Cavendish, William, 164 

Cavendish, Lord William, 276, 295 

Cavendish, Mr., 429 

Cecil, Sir Robert, see Salisbury, Earl of 

Celebes, see Macassar 

Celestines, 97 n 

Ceram, see Seran 

Ceylon, 337 ; commodities to be 
obtained there, 84 

Chamber, William, 164, 169 

Chamberlaine (or Chamberlyn), An- 
drew, 166, 277 

Chamberlaine(or Chamberlyn), George, 
165, 276 

Chamberlaine (or Chamberlyn), John, 
277 

Chamberlaine (or Chamberlyn), Rich- 
ard, 165, 276 

Chamberlaine(or Chamberlyn) , Robert, 
164, 276 

Chambers, Mr., 32 n 

Champion, Richard, 18, 277 

Chandler (or Chandler), George, 165, 
277 

Charles I., 122 n, 164 n, 446 n 

Charles, ship, 463 

Charter granted by Queen Elizabeth 
to the Company, 163 ; of 3ist May, 
1609, referred to, 466 

Chase, William, 33, 36-38 

Chatham, 209 

Chauncey, George, 369, 372, 374, 380, 
38i, 384 



Chaucer, quoted, 200 n ; referred to, 

407 n 

Cheremandalle, see Coromandel 
Cherry, Francis, 164, 169 
Chilcott, Robert, 277, 294 
China, 23, 24 n, 73, 78, 134 , 159, 

190, 191 ; cloths, 75 ; commodities, 

459; dishes, 77, 339, 409; a limited 

private trade in, permitted, 58 ; 

stuffs, 339, 409 ; ware, 427 
Chinese junk taken by Sir Edward 

Michelborne, 213 ; junks, 427, 428 ; 

silks, 129, 150, 260, 286, 301, 408, 

428 

Chintzes, 59 n, 459 
Cinnamon, 102, 199, 289, 337, 340, 

410, 462, 480 ; only to be obtained 

in Ceylon, 84 ; how to choose, 84 ; 

private trade in, forbidden, 58, 128, 

258, 299 
Cipher, letters to be written in, 122, 

250 
Civet, 255 ; private trade in, forbidden, 

58 

Clarke, Mr., 121, 123, 126 

Clarke, Richard, 165 

Clarke, Roger, 277, 295 

Claxan, Richard, 94 

Clayborne, Thomas, 304 n ; his ac- 
count of the Second Voyage in Pur- 
chas referred to, 134 n ; notice of, 304 

Cletherowe, Christopher, 277, 293, 484 

Clinche, John, 277 

Cloths, 97, 131, 247 , 250, 254, 255, 
261, 286, 334, 335, 338, 339, 341, 
403, 404, 408, 412, 456, 462 

Clove, ship, 396, 404, 411, 413 w, 423 

Cloves, 36, 40, 41, 60, 66, 74, 76, 80, 
85, 92, 98, 102, 105, 109, 126, 129, 
148, 149, 153, 199, 257-259, 285, 286, 
289, 298, 299, 309, 334, 339, 403, 409, 
430, 462, 480 ; instructions for cleans- 
ing and packing of, 127 ; petition 
regarding the customs on a cargo of, 
218 ; private trade in, forbidden, 58, 
128, 258, 299 

Coachman (or Cowchman), John, 165, 
276 

Cobbe, Robert, 165 

Cobreth, William, agreement with, for 
the voyage for the discovery of the 
North-West Passage, 190 

Cochin, 337 ; wares obtainable there, 
84 

Cochin China, 398 n 

Cockaine, George, 328 



INDEX. 



Cockaine, William, 277, 294 

Cockes (or Cocks), Richard, 165, 277, 
398, 399 w, 413, 415, 416; notice of, 
398 n 

Cockes (or Cocks or Coxe), Robert, 
101, 165, 277 

Cockes, Tobias, 403 

Codfish, 101, 101 n, 102 

Cody (Gorge or Cordge), a bundle of 
20 pieces, 80 

Coin, see Money 

Coinage of special money for the use 
of the East India Company, 13, 180 

Coles, Elizabeth, 277 

Coles (or Colles), George, 166, 277 n 

Collimore, James, see Cullimore 

Collins, Edward, 95 

Colombo, 84 

Colthurst, Christopher, 48-52, 56, 62- 
64 ; notice of, 48 n 

Combe, John, 164, 169, 277 

Combeer, 73 n 

Commission, a, for provision of neces- 
saries, &c., for the home-coming 
ships of the Second Voyage, 87 

Commissions : Company's : for the 
First Voyage, 4; Second Voyage, 51 ; 
Third Voyage, 114; Fourth Voyage, 
240 ; Fifth Voyage, 296 ; Sixth 
Voyage, 328 ; Seventh Voyage, 369 ; 
revised copy of, 379; Eighth Voyage, 
396 ; Royal : for the First Voyage, 2 ; 
Second Voyage, 48 ; Third Voyage, 
ill; Fourth Voyage, 227; Fifth 
Voyage, 282 ; Sixth Voyage, 356 ; 
Seventh Voyage, 359 ; Tenth Voy- 
age, 437 ; Twelfth Voyage, 442 ; for 
voyages in 1614, on account of the 
First Joint Stock, 449, 452 ; for a 
voyage in 1616,463; the Company 
authorized to issue, to their com- 
manders, 468, 493, 497 ; issued by 
the Company to their principal 
commanders, form of, 493 ; for the 
captains of separate vessels, form of, 
497 ; to be sealed with a special seal, 
475 ; to Captain George Way- 
mouth, for an expedition in search 
of the North-West Passage, 22 

Committees, names of first, 169 ; to be 
elected yearly, 171, 172 ; oath to be 
taken by, 171, 173 

Comorin, Cape, 84 

Comoro Islands, 137 ; Dutch seamen 
killed in the, 137 ; loss of men at, in 
the First Voyage, 137 n 



Compostel, Hendric Jacobsz, 80 n 

Compton, William, 295 

Consent, pinnace, 96, 98, 99, 102, 114, 

115^, 121-126, 131, 2i8n, 285, 304 
Constantinople, 122 n, 218, 249, 320, 

436, 446; an English resident am- 
bassador at, 1 20 
Cooke, Mr., 115 n 
Cope, Sir Walter, 130 n 
Copenhagen, 446 n 
Copper, 85 
Coppin, , 227, 230, 285, 359, 363, 

440, 445, 455, 467, 478 
Cordall, Thomas, 46, 164, 169 
Corea, 134 n 
Corianderseeds, 199, 480 
Cornelius, John, 165, 277 
Corney, Bolton : his Voyage of Sir 

Henry Middleton referred to, 61 n, 

87 n, 91 n, 210 n 
Coromandel coast, the, 73, 75, 79, 85, 

131, 261, 363 n, 427, 428 
Corslets, 78 
Gotten, Allen, 277 
Cotton, 427, 428; yarn, 255, 337, 406, 

428 

Cotton, Sir Dodmore, 443 n 
Cotton, Richard, 94 
Cotton (or Gotten), Roger, 166, 277 
Cotton, William, 165, 277 
Councils, to determine all criminal 

and civil causes, &c., on board ship 

and in the Indies, 374, 384, 398 
Court Minutes, referred to, 4 n, II n, 

18 n, 69 n, 99 n, loon, 102 n, 103 n, 

lion 114 , 128 n, 130 n, 136/2, 

138 n 140 n, 142 n, 

146 n 152 n 155 n, 

166 n 195 n 210 n 

224 n 231 n 235 n 

247 n 269 n 271 n 

275 n 277 278 n 

305 n 306 n 307 n 

468 n 502 n 
Courten, Mr., 122 n 
Courthop, Captain, 288 n 
Courts, place of assembly, 175 
Covert, Robert, 235 n 
Cowchman, John, see Coachman 
Coxe, Robert, see Cockes 
Cozuke, Sophony, 288, 492 n ; notice 

of, 288 n 
Cray ford, 307 
Grippes, Ellis, see Crispe 
Crispe, Ellis, 165, 277 
Crispe, Nicholas, 165, 277, 484 



143 . 

, 156 n 


H5 "> 
158 n, 


219 
236 n 


223 n, 
240 n, 


273 n 
285 n 
308 n 


274 n, 
288 n, 
446 , 



INDEX. 



Croashawe, Edward, 277 

Crompton, Hugh, 166 

Crompton, Thomas, no 

Cullimore (or Collimore), James, 166, 
277 

Cumberland, Earl of, 44, 164 

Cumminseeds, 199, 317, 480 

Cunningham, Sir James, 491 ; letter 
to, from James I., for the establish- 
ment of a Scottish East India Com- 
pany, 490 

Customs : memorandum of agreement 
with the farmers of His Majesty's, 
155 ; transportation of certain goods 
free of, 155 ; goods exported by 
the Company during first four 
voyages to be free from, 176; time 
to be allowed for the payment of, 
upon goods imported by the Com- 
pany, 177 ; allowance to be made 
in event of goods exported by the 
Company miscarrying, 178 ; not 
to be levied a second time on goods 
brought in by the Company and 
sold for export, 179; disputes as to 
amounts payable, 212, 218; instruc- 
tions to Company's servants as to 
reception of officers of, boarding 
home-coming ships, 305 ; Turkish, 
on goods from Persia, 462 

Cutlar, Thomas, 295 

Dabul, 321, 342, 411 

Dachem, see Acheen 

Daggs, 85 

Dale, William, 165 

Daman (in Gujarat), 24772, 251 

Damascus, 78, 120, 249 

Damasks, 76, 78, 428 

Damon (port in Persia), 458 

Dartmouth, 187, 346, 378, 419 

Dates, 200, 480 

Davis, Captain John, nn, 134 n, 2gon 

Davis, John, his Relation (mPurchas) 

referred to, 68 n 
Davis (or Davies), John, of Limehouse, 

290, 304 ; notice of, 290 n 
Dawes, Richard, 396, 399 
Dawn of British Trade to the East 

Indies referred to, 21 n, 158 n 
Deane, James, 164 
Deane, Richard, 166, 277, 295 
Dedyer, 73 
De Graeffe (or Grove), Philip, 240; 

bill of adventure to, 239, 269 ; his 

wife, 269 ; notice of, 239 n 



Delane, John, 94 

Delisha, 410 

Demi-culverin, issue of, by the Master 

of the Ordnance, for presentation to 

the king of Macassar, 499 
Denham, Thomas, Provost of the 

Mint, 13 

Denmark, 193, 194 
Dent, Francis, 165 
Denton, Adam, 369, 372, 374, 380, 

38i, 384 

Deptford, 209, 307, 308 
Deserters, warrant to apprehend, 

lion, 209 

Devonshire, Earl of, 44 
Diamonds, 83, 84, 150, 287 ; private 

trade in, forbidden, 299 
Dickenson, Symond, 126, 149 
Dictionary of National Biography 

referred to, 412 n 
Die (or Dye), Roger, 277, 295 
Digges, Sir Dudley, 164 n 
Diu, 220, 24.7 n, 251 
Dobson, Thomas, 33, 36, 37 
Doggett, William, 277 
Do-patta, 75 n 

Dorchester, John, 144 n, 145, 334 
Dorchester, Richard, 144 n 
Dorrington, George, 277 
Dorset, Earl of, see Buckhurst, Lord 
Downton, Nicholas, 47 n, 11572,22872, 

318, 329, 343, 346, 347..359I notice 

of, 318 n ; royal commission to, for 

a voyage in 1614, 449 
Dragon (piece-goods), 73, 77, 78, 79 
Drag-on, ship, 7 n, 8, 27, 33 n, 48 n, 

51 n, 52n, 56, 62, 63, 65, 87 n, 95, 

98, IO2, 114, 115, I2I-I24, 126, 132, 

134 n, 146-148, 152, 196, 239 n, 286, 
287, 308, 312, 314, 315, 317, 430, 

437 

Drake, Sir Francis : his visit to 
Ternate, 68, 429 

Drayton's Pastorals quoted, 200 n 

Drinking glasses, 76, 77 

Drugs, 126, 309, 340, 410, 428, 459 

Ducats, 306 

Ducie (or Dewsy), Robert, 166, 277 

Dunkin (or Duncken), James, 166, 
277 

Dunnor, 73 

Dutch, the, 131, 183 n, 210, 233 n, 259, 
261, 288 n, 289, 376, 385, 412 n, 
424 n, 430-432 ; capture Amboyna, 
68 ; commissioners, 164 n ; com- 
petition in trade at the Moluccas, 



512 



INDEX. 



124; competition in the East 
India Trade, 211 ; enterprise of the 
factors, 132, 150, 261 ; factory at 
Masulipatam, 85, 460 ; friendship 
to be cultivated, 93 ; letter from the 
States of Banda to the English 
factors at Bantam, soliciting assist- 
ance against the, 492 ; notes of a 
voyage to the East Indies, 80; 
pepper to be sold to, 35 ; pepper 
sold to, by Gabriel Towerson, 136 ; 
Portuguese avoid commerce with 
the, 83 ; Portuguese contentions 



with, 212; ships, letters sent by, 
n, 58, 150; petition from the 
>t India Company, complaining 



of injuries sustained at the hands of, 
429 ; stop English trade at Banda, 
431 ; and English commissioners, 
proposed conference of, 432, 434 ; 
royalls borrowed of the, 286 ; seamen 
killed in the Comoro Islands, 137 ; 
voyage of, to Bantam, 429; ware- 
house at Bantam burnt, 65 
Dye, Roger, see Die 

Eagle -wood, 428 n 

Earle, Robert, 267, 268 

East India Company : accounts of the : 
instructions to Richard Mountney 
for the better keeping of, 502 ; 
Council order for defaulting ad- 
venturers to bring in their sub- 
scriptions, on pain of imprisonment, 
I ; defaulting adventurers to be 
reported to the Council, 9 n, n; 
the Council's second order for 
payment of adventures, 12; warrant 
summoning defaulters to bring 
in their arrears of contributions 
at once, 18 ; subscriptions of adven- 
turers, 1 60 ; names of adventurers 
in the Third Voyage, 275 ; in the 
Fourth Voyage, 294 ; agreement 
with Captain George Waymouth 
for a voyage for the discovery of a 
North-West Passage, 21 ; with 
William Cobreth for the same 
purpose, 190 ; agreement with the 
porters, 88 ; agreement with the 
wharfinger, 89; agreement with 
factors, for the Third Voyage, 140 ; 
agreement with Edmond and George 
Scott, for the reference of a dispute 
to arbitration, 293 ; agreement with 
Peter Floris and Lucas Antheumis 



for the Seventh Voyage, 363 ; 
agreement with Sir Thomas Roe, 
appointed ambassador to the Great 
Mogul, 446 ; agreement with George 
Hall for the supply of ironwork, 
anchors, &c., &c., 501 ; bale mark 
of the, 365 ; bonds entered into, by 
the commanders and others, for the 
Third Voyage, 145-147; charter 
granted by Queen Elizabeth to the, 
163 ; commission issued by, to the 
commander of a fleet, form of, 493 ; 
the captains of separate vessels, 
form of, 497 ; Company's commis- 
sions for the First Voyage, 4 ; Second 
Voyage, 51; Third Voyage, 114; 
Fourth Voyage, 240; Fifth Voyage, 
296 ; Sixth Voyage, 328 ; Seventh 
Voyage, 369, 379; Eighth Voyage, 
396 ; Company's commissions, 
special seal to be used for, 475 ; 
proposed conference of English and 
Dutch commissioners, 432, 434 ; 
committees, names of the first, 169 ; 
governour, Thomas Smyth ap- 
pointed to be the first, 169 ; 
letter from the Privy Council 
urging the adventurers to proceed 
without delay with their pre- 
parations for the First Voyage, 
9; letters to the factors at Bantam 
in December, 1603, 38, 40 ; sent in 
the Third Voyage, 147 ; letters of 
reprisals for, 191 ; letters patent 
for the exportation of money in the 
Third Voyage, 196; letters patent 
for the exportation of foreign 
money in the Fourth Voyage, 224; 
for the exportation of foreign coin, 
and for the issue to their captains of 
commissions of martial law, &c., 
468 ; for the exportation of foreign 
coin, 500 ; for mitigation of the 
statute for garbling spices, 199 ; for 
sale of spices, &c., in bulk un- 
garbled, and for exportation of silver, 
479 ; warrant for the coining of 
money for the First Voyage, 13 ; 
warrant for the exportation of foreign 
coin in the Fifth Voyage, 282 ; the 
Company the "loving friends" of 
their servants, 125 n ; rules and 
ordinances established by, for the 
guidance of trade, &c., 156, 158; 
correspondence with the Lord Trea- 
surer relative to the sale of certain 



INDEX. 



513 



pepper, 27-32, 42-45; letter from 
Richard Steel to the, relative to 
trade in Persia, 457 ; instructions for 
Sir Thomas Roe as to opening up a 
trade with Persia, 455 ; petition for 
exclusive trade to the East Indies, 
c., 211; petition regarding the cus- 
toms payable on a cargo of cloves, 
218 ; petition regarding the customs 
payable on a batch of nutmegs, 
212 ; petition for the mitigation of 
the statute for garbling spices, 205 ; 
petition to the Lord Treasurer, com- 
plaining of injuries sustained at the 
hands of the Dutch, 429; peti- 
tions for licence to export foreign 
money in the Fourth Voyage, with- 
out recoining, 207, 208, 214-216 ; 
petition against impressment of the 
Company's seamen, 209 ; petition 
for letters of safe conduct from the 
Grand Signior, 217 ; petition for 
letters to Eastern potentates, 103, 
216; petition complaining of the 
action of the Portuguese in the East 
Indies, and soliciting that steps 
may be taken for obtaining the 
release of prisoners captured by 
them, &c., 219; privileges granted 
by the King of Acheen, 69; safe 
conduct from the Grand Signior 
for trade to the Red Sea, 266, 434 

East India Company, Scottish : letter 
from James I., for the establish- 
ment of a, 490 

East Indies, Sir James Lancaster's in- 
structions for a voyage to the, 118, 
136; Company's request that letters 
may be written to certain kings and 
governors in the, for the Third 
Voyage, 103 ; request for further 
letters to the potentates of the, 216 ; 
letter from Queen Elizabeth to the 
kings of the, 19 ; letters from 
James I. to the various kings and 
potentates of the, 46, 231, 232, 348- 
355> 388-395, 421-426; letter from 
the king of Bantam to James I., 
67 ; letter from the king of Tidore 
to James I., 67 ; letter from the 
king of Ternate to James I., 68 ; 
letter from the Great Mogul to 
James I., 478 ; Sir Edward Michel- 
borne's report of his experiences in 
the, 274 n ; notes of a Dutch 
voyage to the, 80 



Ebony, 61 

Edwardes, William, 449 n 

Effects of men dying at sea, disposal 
of, 132, 246, 302, 332, 373, 382, 
401 

Effingham, Lord Howard of, see 
Nottingham, Earl of 

Eighth Voyage, the, 92 n f 42in, 422 n, 
423 n ; books for the factors residing 
in the Indies sent in, 419 ; Com- 
pany's commission and instructions 
to John Saris and Gabriel Towerson 
for, 396; engaged men only to 
proceed in, 416 ; royal letters to 
various Eastern potentates, &c., 
carried in, 388-395; instructions as 
to delivery of the royal letters and 
presents, 404 ; private trade for- 
bidden, 414; safe conduct from the 
Grand Signior carried out in, 434 ; 
sealed instructions carried in, 416 

Eldred, John, 114 n, 164, 169, 277, 
294; requested to relieve English 
prisoners at Lisbon, 306; notice of, 
164 n 

Elephant's teeth, see ivory 

Elizabeth, Queen, 48, 68-70, 103, 158, 
192, 195, 196, 224; charter granted 
by, to the Company, 163 ; commis- 
sion to Captain James Lancaster for 
the First Voyage, 2 ; letter to the 
kings of the East Indies, 19 ; death 
of, 38, 41, 46 

Ellacott, John, 166, 277 

Ellimore (or Elsmore), Edward, 94, 95 

Elmer, John, 399 

Emeralds, 326 

Emerson, Anthony, 307 

Emmesworth (or Emsworth), Thomas, 
288, 290, 291, 302-304 

Erindi, 201, 480 

Essex, Earl of, 38, 134 n 

Essington, Thomas, 369, 372, 374, 
379-381, 3841 387 388; notice of, 
369 n 

Europa Rocks, see Judea, flats of 

Evans, Simon, 369, 372, 374, 380, 381, 

3.84 

Evington, Francis, 165, 277 
Expedition, ship, 115 n, 235/2, 282, 

290, 296, 313,431,442 

Factories to be settled at Banda, 
Ternate, and Tidore, 129, 259; at 
Priaman, 133, 262 ; enquiries to be 
made as to those settled by Mr. 



514 



INDEX. 



Sharpie, 347 ; first establishment of, 
in Japan, 396 n, 398 n 

Factors: to be left at various ports, 
6, 64, 133, 157, 262 ; to be left at 
Aden, 123, 250; to be left at 
Banda, Ternate, and Tidore, 129, 
259; to be left at Surat, if need- 
ful, 255, 256 ; to keep accounts 
and be privy to all purchases, 413 ; 
the dealings of, at Bantam, to be 
examined, 303 ; bad keeping of 
accounts at Bantam by, 312 ; 
account books for, 342 ; not to con- 
fine themselves to Bantam, 288 ; 
bills of adventure to, for the Third 
Voyage, 138, 139, 140, 143; bonds 
given by, and by their friends, for 
the Third Voyage, 140, 143 ; books 
provided for the, residing in the 
Indies, 419 ; not to assume the 
name of Captain, 343 ; estates of 
deceased, 66, 70, 132 ; instruc- 
tions to be given to, by the com- 
manders, 260 ; instructions to, in the 
Sixth Voyage, 319; instructions 
relative to, sent in the Sixth Voyage, 
324 ; letters sent to, at Bantam, 
in December, 1603, 38, 40 ; letter 
sent to, at Bantam, in the Third 
Voyage, 147 ; letter to, at Bantam, 
sent in the Sixth Voyage, 312 ; 
of the Fourth Voyage, Tetter to, 
308; letter to, at Surat, sent in 
the Sixth Voyage, 315; not to im- 
part information to their private 
friends, 131, 149, 261, 302 ; to seek 
new sources of trade, 131 ; to enquire 
as to best articles for trade, 301 ; of 
the Third and Fourth Voyages to 
act in unison, 236 n, 237 ; to keep 
an account of their private trade, 
93 ; limit to private trade of, for the 
Third Voyage, 142 ; private trade 
of, forbidden, 128, 258, 299, 317; 
to weigh purchases, 258, 300, 341 ; 
to write often, 150 

Falmouth, 346, 378, 418 

Famagusta, 434 n 

Farmers of the Customs, disputes with, 
155, 212, 218 

Farnando bucke, or Pernambuco wood, 
61 

Farrar, Erasmus, 278 

Farrar, Nicholas, 277 

Farrington, Thomas, 144, 145, 164, 
274, 275, 278, 294 ; notice of, 144 n 



Femell, Lawrence, 309-311, 317, 318, 
326, 328, 329, 335, 341, 343, 419; 
instructions to, and others, in the 
Sixth Voyage, 319 ; notice of, 309 n 

Fennel seed, 317 

Fennugreek, 201,480 

Fenton's voyage of 1582-3, in n 

Feme, Sir John, interloper, to be 
arrested, 466 

Ferrers, William, 278, 294 

Ferris, William, 165 

Ferror, Nicholas, 164 

Field, Joseph, 267 

Fifth Voyage, the, 115*2, 290 n ; pre- 
parations for the equipment of, 267, 
268; royal commission to Captain 
David Middleton for, 282 ; the Com- 
pany's commission and instructions 
for, 296 ; commodities in which 
private trade is forbidden, 299 ; none 
but engaged men to proceed in, 301 ; 
the Commander to bring home an 
inventory of all goods, debts, &c., 
outstanding, 302 ; foreign money 
authorised to be exported in, 282 ; 
letter sent to the factors at Bantam 
in, 285 

Fights, 376 

Finch, William, 126, 315, 334, 403, 
404; notice of, 126 n 

Fines inflicted on members of the 
Company, 161-163 

Firando, 413 n ; factory at, 92 n, 398 n 

First Joint Stock, the, 51 n, 235 n, 
318 n, 449 

First Voyage, the, 9 n, 33 n, 46 n, 
52*2, 95*2, 115*2, 134*2, 137*2, 227*2, 
235 n, 239 n, 290 n ; royal commis- 
sion to Captain James Lancaster for, 
2 ; the Company's commission for, 
4 ; warrant for the coining of money 
for, 13 ; money to be carried in, 180 ; 
ordinances for the guidance of the 
Company's trade, &c., 156, 158 

Fisher, William, 165, 278 n 

Fitch, Ralph, 103*2, 164*2 

Fletcher, John, 166, 278 

Florio's Worlde of Wordes referred to, 
77*2, 201 n 

Floris, Peter, 364-369, 371, 373-375. 
379-388, 421, 424-426; agreement 
with the Company for the Seventh 
Voyage, 363 ; and Lucas Antheumis, 
their plans for the Seventh Voyage, 
427 ; notice of, 363 n 

Flushing, 151 n 



INDEX. 



5*5 



Fortescue, Sir John, 44 

Foster, James, 396, 399 
Fourth Voyage, the, 12472, 135 n, 
227 n, 239 , 267/2, 268, 294/2, 
309 w, 322, 324, 399 n ; accounts of, 
to be kept separate from those of 
previous voyages, 248, 253 ; draft 
bill of adventure to be granted by 
a subscriber to one adventuring 
under him, 271 ; the bill as finally 
approved, 272 ; form of bill of ad- 
venture for the subscribers of, 273 ; 
bill of adventure to Philip de 
Graeffe for, 239, 269 ; names of 
adventurers in, 294 ; bonds entered 
into, by the commanders and others, 
for, 220, 222-224; royal commission 
to Alexander Sharpie and Richard 
Rowles for, 227 ; the Company's com- 
mission and instructions for, 240 ; 
Sir Edward Michelborne's advice in 
regard to, 247 n ; none but engaged 
men to proceed in, 260 ; the com- 
mander to bring home an inventory 
of all goods, debts, &c., outstanding, 
262 ; commodities in which private 
trade is forbidden, 258 ; the factors 
to co-operate with those left in the 
Third Voyage, 236 n, 237; letter 
from the Company to Alexander 
Sharpie, 234; letter to William 
Keeling and others, at Bantam, sent 
in the, 236 ; letter to the factors of, 
sent in the Sixth Voyage, 308 ; letter 
to the commanders of, sent in the 
Sixth Voyage, 311 ; petitions to be 
allowed to export foreign money in, 
207, 208, 214-216; letters patent for 
the exportation of foreign money in, 
224 ; lists of documents delivered to 
Alexander Sharpie and Richard 
Rowles for, 264, 265; safe conduct 
from the Grand Signior to be 
obtained for, 217, 266 

Fowle, Alphonsus, 166, 278 n 

Fowler, John, 326, 336 

Foxe's Book of Martyrs sent to the 
Indies, 419 

Fraine, Hugh, 326, 328, 336 

France, 193, 194 

Freeman, Martyn, 294 

Freeman, Ralph, 278, 293, 294 

Freeman, William, 165, 278 

French Company, 10 n 

French consul at Cairo, letters to be 
sent through, 320 



Fryer, John, 165 

Fryer's Travels quoted, 59 n 

Fuller, Thomas, 396, 399 

Funeral scarfs, ormesines used for, 

77 n 

Futtock-riders, 268 
Fytch, Ralph, see Fitch 

Galangal, 200, 480 

Gallauntes, 97 

Galls, 200, 480 

Gandevi River, 228 n 

Garblers sent to the Indies, 57 

Garbling of spices, letters patent for 

mitigation of the statute for, 199 ; 

petition of the Company for the 

mitigation of the statute for, 205 ; 

letters patent permitting sale of 

spices in bulk without, 479 
Gardiner, John, 278 
Gar ra way, Henry, 484 
Garway, Thomas, 164 
Garway, William, 87, 164, 169 
Geneva gowns, ormesines used for, 

77 n 
Gerarde, John, his Herball or Generall 

Historic of Plantes referred to, 

200 n ; quoted, 407 n 
Gibson, Anthony, 166, 278 
Gilbert, Sir Humphrey, 499 n 
Ginger, 100, 102, 199, 480 ; green, 

337, 406 ; private trade in, for- 
bidden, 128, 258, 299 
Glascocke, Charles, 278 
Glascocke, Phillip, 309 ; letter of safe 

conduct for, 232 ; notice of, 233 n 
Glasses, 150 
Glemham (or Glenham), Thomas, 

326, 328, 336 
Globe, ship, 114 n, 369, 380, 387, 421, 

423 n, 427, 463 
Glover, Sir Thomas, ambassador at 

Constantinople, 218 
Goa, 82, 84, 235 n, 349, 351, 399 n ; 

English prisoners at, 219 n, 220, 

390, 391 
Goats, 8 1 

Gobber (piece goods), 79 
Godsalve, Roger, 278 
Goga, 417, 460 
Gold, 81, 158, 187, 427; reported to 

be obtainable at Island of Noua- 

ginnye (? New Guinea), 129, 260; 

payments to be made in, 129, 259 
Gore (or Goare), Ralph, 165, 278 
Gore (or Goare), Robert, 165, 278 



INDEX. 



Gosson (or Gossen), Richard, 165, 
278, 294 

Governour and deputy governour, elec- 
tion of, and oaths to be taken by, 
169, 170, 172; Thomas Smyth ap- 
pointed the first governour, 169 

Grains of Paradise, 201, 480 

Grand Signior, 104, 106, 120, 231, 
232, 249, 354, 395, 456; petition 
for letters of safe conduct from the, 
2 1 7 ; draft of safe conduct to be 
obtained from, for trade in the Red 
Sea, 266; safe conduct granted by, 
for trade in the Red Sea, 434 

Great Mogul, the, 316, 320, 321, 325, 
441, 446, 455; letter from, to 
James I.. 478 

Greene, Benjamin, 326, 328, 329, 336, 

347 

Greene, Lawrence, 484 
Greene, Reynold, 99, 165, 278, 484 
Greenland, 23, 490 
Greenwell, William, 101, 166, 224, 

278, 292, 294 ; notice of, 101 
Greenwood, John, 166, 278 
Greete, Hugh, 328 
Gresik (or Grissee), letter from James I. 

to the king of, 424 
Grove, Philip, see De Graeffe 
Guinea, Coast of, 428 
Guinea pepper, 200 
Gums, 84, 200, 480 
Gunpowder, 83, 84, 315 
Guns, 8 1, 83 
Guptas, the, 287 n 
Guzerat subject to the Portuguese, 

84; vessel taken by Sir Edward 

Michelborne, 213 
Guzerats, the, 85, 333, 335, 342, 343, 

402, 404, 410, 412, 460 

Haggett (or Huggett, or Huggott), 
Bartholomew, 19, 19 n, 166 

Hague, The, 434 

Hakluyt's account of the Dutch voyage 
f J 595 quoted, 376 n ; Voyages 
sent to the Indies, 419 ; referred to, 

HaMor Hull), Jr., Richard, 166 

Hale, William, 166 

Haliday, Sir Leonard, see Holliday 

Hall, George, agreement with the 
Company for the supply of iron- 
work, anchors, &c., 501 

Hamburg, 85 

Hamersley (or Hammersley), Hugh, 



18, 11472, 219 n, 278, 328 n, 347 n, 
484 ; notice of, 18 n 

Hamilton's New Account of the East 
Indies referred to, 252 n 

Hamlet quoted, 344 

Hamor, Ralph, 166, 278, 295 

Hampson, Sir Robert, 164, 278 

Hanford, Humphrey, 165, 278, 484 

Hanse Towns, 193, 194 

Harby (or Haruy), John, 164 

Hare, Samuel, 166 

Harleian MSS. referred to, 163 n 

Harman, Wolfard, 431 

Harrison, Edward, 165, 278 

Harrison, Ralph, 278 

Harrison, William, 3472, 100, 101, 164, 
169, 2ign, 278, 328 n, 484 

Harte, Sir John, 164 

Harvey, Stephen, 165, 295 

Harvie, Robert, 279 

Harvie, Simon, 278 

Harwood, Thomas, 315 

Hasselare, Skepen, 433 

Havard, John, 8, 193 

Hawkins, John, 165, 278 

Hawkins, Mrs., 33 n, in n 

Hawkins, Sir John, in n 

Hawkins, Sir Richard-, loon 

Hawkins, William, 33 n, 133, 135, 136, 
146 n, 228 n, 236,248,259, 278, 310, 
317, 320, 324, 326, 334, 336, 349, 
389, 403, 404 ; royal commission 
to, for the Third Voyage, in ; 
Company's commission to, 114; 
bond entered into by, for the Third 
Voyage, 145 ; letter to, 305 ; notice 
of, 1 1 1 n 

Headpieces, 76, 78, 83, 85, 98, 101, 
150, 288 

Hearne, John, 123, 125, 126,312, 315, 

Hearne, Richard, 18, 166, 278 

Hector, ship, 7 n, 8, 27, 33 n, 48 n, 
51 n, 56, 57, 62, 63, 91, 95, 96, 98, 
99, 102, 114, 115 n, 121-126, I34, 
147, 148, 152, 196, 219 n, 286, 287, 

334. 39 6 -399> 401-403. 405, 4H 

415, 430, 431, 449 
Heies, Sir Thomas, 278 
Heind, Skepen Jacop Gerson, 433 
Helinge, Peter, 19 
Heminge, Roger, 165, 278 
Hemp, 81 

Henry, Prince of Wales, 446 n 
Henshawe, Thomas, 165, 279, 295 
Hewet, John, 164 
Hewett, Thomas, 165 



INDEX. 



Hewett, William, 165 

Heyder, Richard, 278 

Highlord, Edward, 52,56; notice of, 
52 

Highlord, John, 101, 164, 169, 278, 
294 

Hinde, William, 165, 279 

Hindus hold red and yellow to be 
joyous colours, 75 n, 405 n 

Hippon, Anthony, 52 n, 114, 374, 379, 
384 ; bond entered into by, for the 
Third Voyage, 146 ; royal com- 
mission to, for the Seventh Voyage, 
359 ; Company's commission to, 369 ; 
revised copy of, 379 

Histoire de la Navigation aux Indes 
Orientales (1609) referred to, 737* 

Hito, 76 

Hodgson (or Hodgshon), John, 166, 
279 

Hodgson (or Hodgshon), Stephen, 
166, 279 

Hogs, 8 1 

Holdipp, Andrew, 279 

Holland, 67, 68, 69, 164 n, 193, 194, 
434 n ; proposed conference on the 
English grievances, 434 

Holland, Bartholomew, 165, 279 

Hollanders, see Dutch 

Hollaway, John, 278 

Holliday, Sir Leonard, 164, 169, 279 ; 
letter to, and others, 9 ; notice of, 
gn 

Holliday, William, 484 

Holman, George, 166, 279 

Holmeden, Edward, 164, 169 

Hope, ship, 449, 493 

Hopevaell, ship, 86 n 

Hopkins, Randal, 278 

Horton, Thomas, 165, 279 

Hosiander, ship, 437 

How (or Howe), Roger, 164, 169 

Howard, Lord Henry, 44 

Huberd, , 189 

Huggett, Bartholomew, see Haggett 

Hull, 267, 268 

Humble, Richard, 100, 279, 294 

Humfrey, John, 165 

Hurt, William, 294 n 

" Husband," the Company's, 304 n 

Imprisonment of contumacious mem- 
bers of the Company, 163 
India cloths, described, 78; prices, 79 
India, flats of, see Judea, flats of 
" Indian John," 334 



Indigo, 77, 81, 126, 150, 247 n, 252, 
255, 287, 309, 316, 320, 337, 340, 
405, 410, 428, 459, 461 ; private 
trade in, forbidden, 58, 128, 258, 
299 ; Vansleb's references to, 287 n 

Indus, River, 247 n, 251, 252, 342, 
346,411, 459 

Ireland, warrant for the transporta- 
tion of 300 into, 355 

Iron, 81, 82, 83, 85, 96, 101, 131, 150, 
261, 279, 288, 295, 334, 338, 339, 
403, 408, 412, 462 

Ironside, Richard, 166 

Ironwork, price to be paid for, 502 

" Island Voyage " of 1597 referred to, 
134 n 

Ispahan, 457 n, 459, 462 

Ivory, 76, 81, 119, 245, 316, 317, 335; 
in demand at Cambay, 1 19, 245 

Jacatra, 399 n 

Jahangir, the Emperor, 479 n 

Jambi, 290 n 

James I., 105 , 122 n, 134 , 435, 
436; proclaimed King of England, 
39, 41 ; commissions granted by, for 
the Second Voyage, 48; Third Voy- 
age, in; Fourth Voyage, 227; 



Fifth Voyage, 282 ; Sixth Voyage, 
356 ; Seventh Voyage, 359 ; Tenth 
Voyage, 437 ; Twelfth Voyage, 442 ; 
for a voyage in 1614, on account of 
the First Joint Stock, 449 ; for a 
voyage in 1614, 452 ; for a voyage 
in 1616, 463; letter to the king of 
Bantam, 46 ; letters to various 
Eastern potentates, &c., 105-109, 
231,232,348-355, 388-395,421-426; 
letter from the Great Mogul to, 478; 
letter from, for the establishment of a 
Scottish East India Company, 490; 
letters patent for the exportation 
of money for the Third Voyage, 196 ; 
for the Fourth Voyage, 224; for the 
mitigation of the statute for garbling 
spices, 199; for the export of foreign 
coin ; and authorizing the Company 
to issue commissions to their cap- 
tains to punish offenders in the 
voyage, &c., 468, 493, 497 ; autho- 
rising the sale of spices, &c., 
without garbling, if in bulk, and 
permitting the export of silver, 
479 ; fragment of, for the export of 
foreign money, 500 ; instructions to 
the Master of the Ordnance to issue 



INDEX. 



a demi-culverin to the Company, for 
presentation to the King of Macas- 
sar, 499; petitions to, 210, 215; 
safe conduct for John Jourdain and 
Phillip Glascock, 232 ; special au- 
thority to Thomas Best to negotiate 
a treaty with the Great Mogul, 441 

James, ship, 290 n, 463 

Japan, 24, 134 n, 190, 191, 399 n, 
411-414, 417 ; establishment of a 
factory at Firando, 92 n, 396 n, 
398 n ; emperor, or king of, letters 
from James I. to the, 387, 422, 426 

Japanese pirates, 134 n 

Jask, Cape, 457, 459-4^2 

Java, 103, 158, 424 n, 427, 429, 430, 
458 n ; girdles, 59, 73 ; goods, sale 
of, to the Dutch, or Chinese junks, 
91, 92; king of, 135 w; letters from 
James I. to the king of, 108, 231 ; 
slaves brought from, 77 

Jaxon (or Jackson, or Juxon), Thomas, 
164, 279 

Jeayes, Mr., 368 n 

Jecketta, 247 n 

Jennings, William, 165, 271, 279; 
draft bill of adventure from, to 
William Bonham, adventuring under 
him, 271 

Jesuits, 461 
ewels, 5, 126 
ohnson, Robert, 100, 166, 219 n, 279, 

293, 294, 484 
Jones, Thomas, 399 
Jonge's Opkomst van het Nederl : 

Gezag in Oost-Indie referred to, 

80 n 

Jonson, Ben, quoted, 96 n 
Joseph, Benjamin, royal commission 

to, for a voyage in 1616, 463; 

notice of, 463 n 
Jourdain, John, 253, 264, 309, 311; 

safe conduct for, 232 ; notice of, 

233 n 
Journals to be kept in the Company's 

voyages, 23, 116, 242, 297, 331, 370, 

399 
Judea, flats of, 80, 118, 137, 244, 333, 

402 ; identification of, 1 18 n ; loss of 

a Portuguese ship, the St. Jago, on, 

Ii8* 

Jumna, River, 460 
Juxon, Thomas, see Jaxon 

Kamber (or Combeer), 73 

Kanteky (piece goods), 73, 75, 78, 79 



Kassa (piece goods), 73, 78, 79 

Kathiawar, 287 n 

Kayes, Robert, 166 

Keche (or Ketch), Mr., 36, 37 ; Lan- 
caster's instructions to, 33 

Keeling, William, 51, 52, 56, 62, 95 n, 
106, 135, 136, 146 n, 150, 151, 166, 
2 35 i 259, 287, 291, 292, 333, 402, 
431, 442 n ; royal commission to, 
for the Third Voyage, 1 1 1 ; the Com- 
pany's commission to, 114; bond 
entered into by, for the Third 
Voyage, 145; letters from the Com- 
pany to, 90, 154, 236, 305; letter 
from the States of Banda to, solicit- 
ing assistance against the Dutch, 
492 

Kellett, William, 19, 279 

Ken ton, Mr., 41 

Keridge, Thomas, 458 n 

Kerseys, 85, 101, 131, 250, 254, 255, 
261, 335, 404, 456, 462 ; to be pro- 
vided for the Third Voyage, 97 ; 
origin of name, 101 n 

Kettles, Brass, 457 

Key, Robert, 279 

Keyebabbit, 76 

Kinaston, Brian, 279 

Kirby, Geoffrey, 166, 279, 295, 484 

Khorassan Manna, 287 n 

Khurram, Prince, 479 

Kleetghees, 73, 74, 77 

Knevet, Thomas, Warden of the 
Mint, 13 

Knight, John, a pass to, for discovery 
of the North-West passage, 86; 
notice of, 86 n 

Knives, 76, 77, 81, 150 

Knollys, Lord, 44 

Koyem (a weight), 80 

Kreyckam or Kreckam (piece goods), 
74. ?8, 79 

Laba taker or Labetack, 73 

Labrador, 86 n 

Lac, gum, 255, 338, 406, 428 ; private 

trade in, forbidden, 128, 258, 299 
Lackey, 76 

Lahore, 126 n, 287, 459 
Lahores, 460 
Lahori Bandar, 231, 247 n, 251, 252, 

252 n, 253-256, 342, 346, 411 
Lake, Sir Thomas, 207, 216 
Lamkin (? Nankin) silk, 286, 408 
Lancaster, Sir James, 2, 19 n, 26, 38 n, 

39, 41, 47, 52, 58, 59, 65, 69 n, 73, 



INDEX. 



94, 95, 118, 120, 133 n, 134^. IS 1 ' 
164, 169, 195 n, 196, 244, 249, 254, 
264, 265, 289, 290 , 313, 429; 
royal commission to, for the First 
Voyage, 2 ; Company's commis- 
sion to, 4 ; his instructions to the 
factors and others left by him at 
Bantam, 33 ; use of lemon juice as 
an antidote to scurvy by, 100 n ; 
privileges obtained by, at Acheen, 
69, 264, 265, 321 ; his instructions 
for a voyage to the East Indies, 136, 
264, 265 ; notice of, 2 n 

Landak, 288 n 

Langley, Edward, 328 

Lantore, 73, 104, 129, 259 ; letters 
from James I. to the Sabandar of, 
108, 231 

Lanwell, William, 315 

Larkyn, Robert, 326, 328, 336 ; notice 
of, 326 n 

Latter, 73 

Latu, 76 

Lawes (or Lawse), Abraham, 329, 

347 

Lawkin silk, 286 

Lawrence, the surgeon, 94 

Lawrence, Simon, 166, 279 

Lawns, 337, 405 ; Casa, 131, 261 

Lead, 81, 83-85, 96, 101, 131, 150, 
261, 288, 334, 335, 338, 339, 403, 
404, 408, 412, 460, 462; sale of, at 
Surat, 316 

Leaden Hall, 28, 42, 160 n 

Leanynge, Edward, 164, 279 

Leate, Nicholas, 100, 164, 279, 484 

Leaveinge, Edward, see Leanynge 

Lee, Hugh, 219 n 

Lee, Robert, 164 

Leigh, Sir Robert, 277 n 

Leighton, William, 147, 275 ; notice 
of, 275 n 

Lemon, Alderman, 279 

Lemon water, 100, 102 

Lemons, 81 

Lesser James, ship, 33 n 

Letters Patent, granted by Queen 
Elizabeth to the Company, 163; 
for the coinage of special money 
for the First' Voyage, 13; for the 
exportation of money for the 
Third Voyage, 196 ; for the Fourth 
Voyage, 224 ; for the mitigation of 
the statute for garbling spices, 
199 ; for the export of foreign coin ; 
and for the issue by the Company 



of commissions of martial law to 
their captains, 468 ; referred to, 
493, 497 ; for sale of spices, &c., 
without garbling ; and for exporta- 
tion of silver (1616), 479 ; fragment 
of, granted by James I., for the 



ompany, 



export of foreign money, 500 

Levant, the, 120 n, 122 n ; C 
10 n, 18 n 

Licences to trade to the Indies may 
be granted by the Company, 184 

Lidall (or Lydall), Thomas, 166, 279 

Lime used to preserve nutmegs from 
worms, 128 

Linen, 427, 428, 459 

Ling, 101, 102 

Linschoten, J. H. van, his Voyages 
referred to, 81 n, 118 n 

Lion, ship, 442 n 

Lisbon, 120 n, 235 n, 306, 316 ; Eng- 
lish prisoners at, 219 n, 220 

Little Darling, ship, 309, 329, 335, 

Llewellyn (or Luellen), Maurice, 166, 

T 2 ? 9 
Lockra, 73 

London, sickness and mortality in, 29, 

39- 40 

Looking-glasses, 76, 77, 81, 335 
Lord High Admiral, see Nottingham, 

Earl of 
Lord Treasurer, see Buckhurst, Lord, 

and Salisbury, Earl of 
Lossiury, 76 

Love's Labour Lost quoted, 406 n 
Lowe, 76 

Luellen, Maurice, see Llewellyn 
Lutterford, Edward, 165, 279, 295 
Lydall, Thomas, see Lidall 
Lykou, 73 

Lynge, Nicholas, 99, 165, 169, 279 
Lyte's Nieive Herbal quoted, 406 n 

Macassar (or Celebes), 77, 80, 264, 265, 
411 ; description of, with a note of 
wares in demand, 77, 264, 265; king 
of, presentation of a demi-culverin to 
the, 499 

Mace, 36, 60, 66, 73, 74, 99, 102, 126, 
129, 153, 199, 257-259, 289, 298, 309, 
334. 339' 340, 43. 49> 4io, 411, 430, 
480; times of gathering, 74; in- 
structions for cleansing and packing 
of, 127 ; spoilt by use of too much 
lime, 149 ; quality of that procured 
at Bantam, and the Moluccas, 149 ; 



520 



INDEX. 



private trade in, forbidden, 58, 128, 
258, 299 

Mace, William, 137 n 

Madagascar (Island of St. Lawrence), 
54,55,80, 118, 119, 134, 136, 137, 
153, 222 n, 228 n, 244-246, 253 n, 333, 
401 , 402; murder of Mr. Rowles 
and others in, 222 n 

Madgawgen, 73 

Madyncens, Madinrens, or Madmay- 
rens (piece goods), 73, 78, 79 

Magellan, Straits of, 174 

Mail, shirts of, 98 

Maio, island of, 54 

Malabar, coast of, 83, 124, 256, 459 

Malacca, 34, 428 

Malaguetta pepper, 201 n 

Malay girdles, 59; peninsula, 134 n, 
425 n 

Malim (piece goods), 73 

Mallya (piece goods), 75 

Malynes' Lex Mercatoria quoted, 
14 n 

Mamelen, 76 

Manley, Nicholas, 165 

Manna, 287 n 

Mansfeild, Sir Robert, letter to, re- 
questing permission to store iron 
ordnance at Deptford, 307 

Maplesden, Richard, 280, 295 

Mare Scourge, ship, see Dragon 

Markham's Voyages of Sir James 
Lancaster referred to, 2 n, 27 n, 
86 n, 137 n, 42972 

Marlowe, Anthony, 120, 125, 126, 133, 
135, 219 n, 287, 316 ; letter to, rela- 
tive to his release from prison at 
Lisbon, 306 ; notice of, 120 n 

Marlowe, Edmund, 121 n 

Marmosets, 130, 301 

Marseilles, letters to be sent through 
Henry Berry at, 320 

Marshe, Thomas, 164 

Marten, Thomas, 478 

Martial Law, the commanders to use, 
4, 50, 112, 229, 284, 357, 361, 439, 
444, 450, 453, 464, 473; letters 
patent, granted by James I., em- 
powering the Company to issue 
commissions to their commanders 
to exercise, 468, 493, 497 

Martin, Michael, 95 

Martin, Sir Richard, 13, 1 8 

Martin, Richard, junior, 13 

Martyn, John, 502 

Maskinilliacos, 81 



Masse or masha, a weight for precious 

stones, 67 n 
Masulipatam, 52 n, T$n, 75, 79, 85, 

131, 261, 363 n, 369^, 427; Dutch 

factory at, 85, 460; free trade at, 

85 ; goods made at, 85 
Matalife, Cornelius, 285 
Matchlocks, 81, 83, 84 
May, Henry, his account of Lancaster's 

first voyage to the Indies referred 

to, I37 

Mea (piece goods), 77 
Measure for Measure quoted, l2On 
Mediterranean Sea, 436 
Meggs, William, 279 
Melinda, coast of, 118, 119, 137 n, 244, 

245 

Merchant of Venice quoted, ngn 
Merchant Royal, ship, 267, 268 
Merchants' Hope, ship, H5 
Merricke, John, 165, 279 
Merry Wives of Windsor quoted, 376 n 
Mesepatamya (a mistake for Masuli- 
patam, 'which see) 
Miako, 92 n 

Michelborne, Sir Edward, 164, 290 n, 
314, 318 ; his advice in regard to 
the Fourth Voyage, 247 n ; Guzerat 
vessel taken by, 213; piracies of, 
134, 135^, 151, 211, 213, 262, 302; 
notice of, 134^ 

Middelburg (in Holland), 151 
Middleton, David, 7 n, 46 n, 67, 124, 
133. 135. !36, 146 n, 153, 218 n, 285, 
290, 302-304, 313, 431 ; bond entered 
into by, for the Third Voyage, 145 ; 
Company's commission to, for the 
Third Voyage, 114; royal com- 
mission to, for the Fifth Voyage, 
282 ; Company's commission to, 
296; commission for a voyage in 
1614, 452 ; letter from Company to, 
152 ; illegal sale of ordnance by, 
285; notice of, 115^ 
Middleton, Sir Henry, 7 n, 34 n, 46, 
65, 67, 68, 92 n, 94, ii i n, 115 n, 
I34w, 151, 228n, 233 n, 23577,304 n, 
308^,309-311,314,317,318,345-347, 
349-355> 43> 43. 43 1 I royal com- 
mission to, tor the Second Voyage, 
48 ; Company's commission to, 51 ; 
his instructions to the factors left 
by him at Bantam, 91 ; royal com- 
mission to, for the Sixth Voyage, 
356; Company's commission to, 328 ; 
notice of, 46 n 



INDEX. 



521 



Middleton, John, 7, 46 n, 115^, 165, 
169 ; notice of, 7 n 

Middleton, Robert, 101, 165, 279, 292, 
293, 328 n, 347 , 431, 434, 434*1; 
letter from, to certain Burgomasters 
at Amsterdam, 432 ; notice of, 432 n 

Middleton, Thomas, 46 

Middleton, Mrs. (widow of David), 
115* 

Mildmay (or Myldmay), Robert, 19, 
165, 279 

Millett, William, 166, 279, 295 

Milward, Humphrey, 166, 279 

Mocha, 46 n, 217, 228 n, 235 n, 246- 
249, 251, 308, 309 n, 311, 320, 334, 
340, 341, 346, 347, 403, 410, 436; 
letters from James I. to the Governor 
of, 231, 232; instructions for opening 
up trade at, 248 ; draft of safe con- 
duct for trade at, 266 ; safe conduct 
from the Grand Signior for trade at, 
434 

Mogul, the Great, see Great Mogul 

Moluccas, the, 57, 60, 62, 65, 66, 68, 
74, 76, 78, 80, 85, 91, 92, 95, 99, 105, 
106, 120, 124, 126, 131, 132, 138, 150, 
153, 249, 254, 256, 257, 261, 286, 
288 n, 288-291, 298, 338-340, 342, 
346, 404, 407, 409, 410, 413, 414, 
417, 429, 430 ; a pinnace to go from 
Bantam on a trading voyage to, 33 ?;, 
34, 36 ; Gabriel Towerson, a principal 
factor for, 33 n ; Dutch opposition to 
Company's trade, 105, 109; letters 
from James I. to the king of, 109, 
231 

Molyneux, Mathew, 114, 315, 329; 
notice of, 114 n 

Monaginnye (New Guinea ?), see 
Nouaginnye 

Money, warrant for the coining of, for 
the First Voyage, 13 ; coined speci- 
ally for the First Voyage, 159 ; to 
be carried in the first and succeeding 
voyages, 180, 181 ; to be brought in 
by the Company after every voyage, 
186; ports for shipment of, 187; 
letters patent for the exportation of, 
to the East Indies, 196 ; petitions to 
be allowed to export foreign, in the 
Fourth Voyage, 207, 208 214-210; 
export of foreign, 212 ; letters patent 
for the exportation of foreign, in the 
Fourth Voyage, 224; foreign, to be 
exported in the Fifth Voyage, 282 ; 
warrant for the 'transportation of 



300 into Ireland, 355; safeguarding 
of, in case of wreck, &c., 419 ; letters 
patent for the export of foreign, 468, 
479 ; fragment of letters patent, 
granted by James I., for the export 
of foreign, 500 ; Persian, 462 

Monkeys, 130, 301 

Moore, John, 164, 169, 274, 280 

Moors, 342, 411 

Mora (piece goods), 75 

More, James, 95 

More, John, see Moore 

Moredie (piece goods), 79 

Morgan, Thomas, 34, 35, 64, 65 ; 
Lancaster's instructions to, 34 ; letter 
to, 40 

Morris, Griffin, 240 

Morris, John, 279 

Moseley, Clement, 165 

Mossaffey (piece goods), 73, 75, 75 n, 

79 

Mosul, 73 n 
Mountney, Richard, 304 ; instructions 

to, for the better keeping of the 

accounts of the Company, 502 
Mozambique, 81, 119, 245 
Muscat, 235 n 
Muschamp, George, 33 n 
Muscovy Company, 10 n t 490 n 
Muferr, 73 

Mun (or Munnes), Thomas, 484 
Musgrave, Edmund, 290, 296, 304 
Musk, 131, 255, 261, 287, 428 ; private 

trade in, forbidden, 58, 128, 258, 

299 

Muskets, 83, 288 
Myldmay, Robert, see Mildmay 
Myrrh, 255, 340, 410 

Nankin, 286 n 

Nares' Glossary quoted, 376 

Neira or Banda Neira, 73, 104, 129, 
259; letters from James I. to the 
Sabander of, 107, 231, 355, 395 

Nelson, Thomas, 280 

Nettles, Edward, 288 

Newbery, John, 16472 

Newfoundland, 101 n 

New Guinea, 78 n, 129*1, 260 

Newman, John, 165, 280 

Newport, Christopher, 493 ; royal 
commission to, for the Twelfth 
Voyage, 442 ; notice of, 442 n 

New Year's Gift, ship, 318 n, 449 

Nicaragua wood, 61 n 

Nicholls, Christopher, 280, 295 

I N 



522 



INDEX. 



Nicholson, Edmond (or Edward), 165, 
280 

Nigcrtuttie (Nagar Thato), 231, 247 n, 
252, 346 ; factory suggested at, 321 

Nineveh, 73 n 

Ninth Voyage, the, 290 n 

North West Passage, Company of 
Merchant Discoverers of the, 10 n, 
46 n ; agreement with George Way- 
mouth, for a voyage in search of 
the, 21 ; with William Cobreth for 
the same purpose, 190 ; pass to John 
Knight for the same purpose, 86 ; 
resolve to attempt to discover a 
route to the Indies by the, 159 

Nottingham, Charles, Earl of, Lord 
High Admiral, 191 ; letter from, 
195 ; petition to, 209 

Nouaginnye (New Guinea?), gold 
obtainable at, 12972, 260 

Nusitelle, 76 

Nutmegs, 36, 40, 41, 73, 74, 99, 100, 
102, 104, 126, 129, 153, 199, 257-259, 
289, 298, 300, 334, 339, 340, 403, 
409-411, 430, 480; instructions for 
cleansing and packing of, 127 ; bad 
quality of those received from 
Bantam, 149 ; spoilt by use of too 
much lime, 149 ; petition to the 
Lord Treasurer as to the customs 
payable on a batch of, 212 ; private 
trade in, forbidden, 58, 128, 258, 
299 

Oatgens, Burgomaster, 433 

Oaths to be taken by Governour, 
Deputy Governour, and others, 170, 
172 

Offley, Robert, 164, 280, 328 n, 347 n, 
484 

Offley, William, 164 

Ofjeld (or Owfield), Roger, 165 

Olibanum, 255, 337, 340, 406, 410 

Oman, Gulf of, 342 n 

Opium, 255, 337, 340, 406, 410 

Oranges, 81 

Ordinances for the guidance of the 
Company's trade, 156, 158 

Ordnance, brass breech-loading, men- 
tioned, 73, 78 ; illegal sale of, by 
David Middleton, 285 ; letter from 
the Company requesting permission 
to store, on the king's wharf at 
Deptford, 307 

Orlop decks, 116, 242, 297, 330, 370, 
371,381, 397 



Ormesines or Armozeens (piece 

goods), 77 

Ormuz, 235 n, 325, 457, 459 
Ortattan, 73 n 
Osmotherley, Richard, 280 
Osse, Dericke von, letters from Bantam 

to be sent through, 151 
Overland trade between Persia and 

India, 459 

Owfeild, Roger, see Ofield 
Oxinden, Sir George, 41 9 n 

Pahang, 427 

Palmer, Peter, 280 

Palmer, Robert, 280 

Palmer, William, 19, 165, 280 

Palmer, William (of Leadenhall), 
280 

Palroyen, or Pulo Ron, 73 

Pangram Pattie, king of Java, 103 

" Parchment Records" (India Office) 
referred to, 163 n 

Parrots, 130, 301 

Parvish, Mr., 122 n 

Pasfyld, Samuel, letter from, to 
Robert Middleton, 434 

Paslowe, Giles, 165, 280 

Patani, 134*2, 233 n, 326 n, 363 n, 
36972, 427, 428 

Patris, 425 n 

Patta (piece goods), 73, 75, 77-79 

Pattala (piece goods), 74 

Pavier, William, 280 

Pavij, Burgomaster, 433, 434 

Pavij, Pentionalis, 433 

Paw (silk goods), 79 

Peach wood, 6 in 

Peacock, Tempest, 397, 404, 416; 
notice of, 398 n 

Pearce, Richard, 101, 165, 280 

Peard, Nicholas, 164 

Pearl fishery, 325 

Pearls, 83, 84, 131, 150, 261 ; private 
trade in, forbidden, 299 

Pemba, 82, 119, 245 

Pemberton, William, 329, 347 

Pennell, Mr., 120, 126, 131 

Pennington, Robert, 18, 166, 280 

Pepper, 35, 40, 41, 60, 80, 84, 91, 98, 
loo, 102, 126, 133, 136, 138, 151, 
158, i6on, 199, 200, 257, 259, 263, 
291, 303, 312, 314, 317, 338, 340, 
408, 410, 429, 459, 462, 480 ; 
left at Bantam by Lancaster, 
58, 60 ; correspondence with the 
Lord Treasurer relative to sale of 



INDEX. 



523 



certain, 27-32, 42-45 ; loss in, 
through garbling at Bantam, 148 ; 
petition for restraint of the im- 
portation of, 210; private trade in, 
by factors, 136 ; private shipments 
of, 314; private trade in, forbidden, 
58, 128, 258, 299 

Peppercorn, ship, 47 n, n$n, 309, 
318 n, 327, 328, 329, 335, 337 

Pepwell, Henry, commission to, from 
James I., for a voyage in 1616, 463 ; 
notice of, 463 n 

Periam (or Peryam), John, 144 n 

Perkins, Rev. William, works of, sent 
to the Indies, 419 ; notice of, 419 n 

Pernambuco wood, 61 n 

Persia, 126 n, 235 n, 320, 442 n, 443 n; 
king of, 461 ; instructions to Sir 
Thomas Roe, as to establishment of 
a trade with, 455 ; letter from 
Richard Steel, to the Company, 
relative to trade in, 457 ; overland 
trade with India, 459 ; commodities 
for trade with, 462 ; Turkish customs 
on goods from, 462 

Persian ambassador, 442 ; carpets, 
463 ; ports, Sir Robert Sherley's 
notes on, 458 n ; silk, 338, 407, 455- 
457 ; weights and monies, 462 

Persian Gulf, 73 n, 320, 325, 462 

Persons, Richard, 166 

Petition from the master and com- 
pany of the Susan for share in 
certain prize money, 26 ; from the 
Company for letters to Eastern 
potentates for the Fourth Voyage, 
216 ; that no further licenses be 
issued to persons other than the 
Company to trade to the East Indies, 

211 ; to be allowed to export foreign 
money in the Fourth Voyage, 207, 
208, 214-216; complaining of the 
piracies of Sir Edward Michelborne, 
213 ; for letters of safe conduct from 
the Grand Signior, 217 ; against im- 
pressment of the Company s seamen, 
209 ; for the mitigation of the 
statute for garbling spices, 205 ; for 
restraint of the importation of 
pepper, 210 ; regarding the customs 
payable on a batch of nutmegs, 

212 ; regarding the customs payable 
on a cargo of cloves, 218 ; com- 
plaining of the action of the 
Portuguese in the East Indies, and 
soliciting that steps may be taken 



for obtaining the release of prisoners 
captured by them, 219; complaining 
of injuries sustained at the hands of 
the Dutch, 429 

Piece goods, 34, 85 ; local denomina- 
tions of, 73-79 ; difficulty in 
identifying local denominations of, 
73 n] prices of, 79 

Pindar, Paul, consul at Aleppo, 122, 
250; notice of, 122 n 

Pinthadoes, 34, 36, 62, 73, 85, 131, 
256, 261, 338, 408, 459; note on, 
59 n 

Piott (or Pyott) Richard, 166, 280 

Pipkins, 76 

Pistols, 81, 83, 85 n, 288 

Philippine Islands, 413 

Phillips' New World of Words quoted, 
85, 376 n 

Plantains, 81 

Plate, gilt, for presents, 336 

Plautus (Aulularia), reference to, 
59 n 

Pluncketts, 97 

Plymouth, 87, 152, 153, 187, 308 n, 
312, 315, 346, 378, 418 

Pointell, Richard, 164, 280, 295 

Polayu, or Pulo Ai, 73 

Polhill, John, 280 

Poling Kintsy (piece goods), 79 

Polsteed, Henry, 166, 280 

Pope, Robert, employed in victualling 
the ships for the First Voyage, n 

Pope, William, no 

Popham, Sir John, 44 

Popinjays (piece goods), 96-98, 462 

Porcelain, 428 ; see also China dishes 

Port Polmone (?Pulicat), 427 

Portcullis Money, 13 n 

Porter, Mathew, 399 

Porters, Company's agreement with 
the, 88 

Portuguese, the, 68, 69, 235 n, 245, 
247 n, 251, 252, 289, 316, 318 n, 321, 
325, 326, 335, 429-43i> .437 n, 459- 
461, 463 n ; caution against attacks 
of the, 62 ; collisions with, to be 
avoided, 113; information to be col- 
lected as to their dominion in Cam- 
bay and Surat, 123 ; at Goa, will buy 
nothing of the Dutch, 83 ; conten- 
tions with the Dutch, 212 ; vessels, 
licence to take, 192 ; capture of two 
English boats near Surat, 219 n, 220, 
315, 349, 351, 390, 391 ; time of start- 
ing from Lisbon, 417 ; ships not to be 



524 



INDEX. 



molested without provocation, 51, 
113, 230, 284, 358,361, 439. 444, 
451, 454, 465, 476, 495 

Potatoes, 8 1 

Poulter (or Powlter), William, 326, 
336 

Prayers to be read morning and 
evening in the Company's voyages, 
36,53, 116, 241, 296, 323, 329, 370, 

397 

Precious stones, 131, 255, 261 ; 
Eastern weights used for, 67 n 

Preston, Edward, 94 

Priaman, 26, 13472, 138, 240 n, 335, 
338, 340, 342, 346, 347, 404, 407, 
408, 410 ; factory to be settled at, 
133, 262 

Price, Mr. F. G. Hilton, 368 n 

Price, Matthew, 95 

Priestley, William, 280 

Pring, Captain, 33 n, 458/2 

Private trade, forbidden, 57, 58, 127, 
128, 258, 299, 310, 313, 317, 344, 
366, 375, 385, 414 ; extent to which 
factors are limited, for the TJiird 
Voyage, 142 ; allowed to the com- 
manders in the Third Voyage, 
146 n ; ordinances for the prevention 
of, 5, 156 ; permitted in China 
dishes or light trifles, 58 ; among 
Company's servants at Bantam, 
95 n ; of Gabriel Towerson, and 
other factors, 136 ; all shipments to 
be registered by the pursers, 314 

Privy Council, order for defaulting 
adventurers to bring in their sub- 
scriptions, I ; defaulting adventurers 
to be reported to, 9 n, n ; second 
order for better payment of promised 
subscriptions, 12 ; letter from, 
urging the Company to proceed 
without delay with their preparations 
for the First Voyage, 9 ; warrant 
for the coining of money for the 
First Voyage, 13 ; petitions to, 207, 
208, 211, 213, 214, 218 

Prize money, application of master 
and company of the Susan to share 
in certain, 26 

Prizes, disposal of, 193 

Provisions, daily allowance of, not to 
be altered, 372, 383; surplus, may 
be sold, 257 

Pularoon, see Ron, Pulo 

Pulicat, 427 ;/ 

Pulo Ai, see Ai, Pulo 



Pulo Rosagijn, see Rosagijn, Pulo 
Pulo Sumatra, see Sumatra Pulo 
Purchas his Pilgrimes referred to, 
34 n, 65/2, 67 n, 68 n, 91 n, 92 n, 
126 n, 133/2, 134 n, 135 n, 163*1, 
222 n, 286 n, 290 n, 304 n, 318/2, 
337 n, 434 n, 435 n 

Pursers, duties of, 127 ; allowance to, 
for keeping account of effects of 
deceased men, 132, 246, 302, 332, 
401 ; to keep accounts, 257, 297, 
299 ; books to be compared with 
those of the factors, 341 ; to be 
continually on board, 413 ; to weigh 
all spices shipped, 257 ; all ship- 
ments of private goods to be 
registered with, 314; to have charge 
of all stores, &c., 330; to keep 
account of expenditure of gunners', 
and other stores, 379, 418; form of 
bond entered into by, for the Third 
Voyage, 147 ; Fourth Voyage, 220, 
224 

Pyott, Richard, see Piott 
Pyrard, Fra^ois, 399 n 

Quarles, William, 164, 280 

C)ueddah, 425 n 

Quicksilver, 317, 334, 335, 403 

Regacke, 73 

Rapiers, 81, 83 

Ras-el-Hadd, Cape, 342, 411 ; its 
various designations, 342 n 

Rata, 73 

Ratisbon, Diet of, 446 n 

Ravenscroft, Thomas, 199, 205 

Raymond, Captain, 2 n, 429 

Razors, 8 1 

Reave (or Reeve), Richard, 253, 263, 
264, 309 ; notice of, 253 n 

Rechill Moley, king of Tidore, 104 

Red a joyous colour among the Hindus, 
75 n 

Red Dragon, ship, see Dragon 

Red lead, 335 

Red Sea, 46 n, 82, in n, 137, 217, 
233 2 35 n > 246, 251, 266, 320, 
334, 340, 343, 354, 394, 403, 410, 
41 1, 434 n ; draft of safe conduct for 
trade in the, 266 ; safe conduct from 
the Grand Signior for trade in the, 

434 

Reeve, Richard, see Reave 
Renington (or Benington), Robert, 

10J 



INDEX. 



525 



Rere, 73 

Reshire, 458 

Revett, William, 263, 264, 309 

Reynolds, William, 326, 328, 336 

Rhubarb, 463 

Rials or Rialls, see Royalls 

Rice, 73, 77, 80, 201, 411, 459, 480 

Rich, Thomas, 420 n 

Richardson, Thomas, 165 

Rider, William, 45 

Riders, 268 

Rings, sent for presents, or for sale, as 
most desirable, 326 

Robinson, Henry, 164, 280, 295 

Robinson, Henry (gent.), 280 

Robinson, Humphrey, 164, 280, 295 

Robinson, Robert, 165, 280, 295 

Roe, Sir Thomas, 33 n, 458 n, 461 ; 
agreement with the Company, on 
his appointment as ambassador to 
the Great Mogul, 446 ; instructions 
to, as to establishment of a trade 
with Persia, 455 ; notice of, 446 n 

Rogerbe, Richard, Comptroller of the 
Mint, 13 

Romeny (or Romney), Sir William, 
32 n, 46, 130 n, 144, 145, 147, 152, 
155, 164, 169, 280, 292, 294; notice 
of, 46 n 

Romeo and Juliet quoted, 407 n 

Romney, Walter, 219 n 

Ron, Pulo, 73 

Rosagijn, Pulo, 73 

Rose, ship, 463 

Rossengen, see Rosagijn, Pulo 

Rowles, Richard, 222 n, 234, 237, 
240 n, 247 n, 253 n, 263, 264, 311, 
401 n ; royal commission to, for 
the Fourth Voyage, 227 ; Com- 
pany's commission to, 240 ; list of 
documents delivered to, for the 
Fourth Voyage, 265 

Royal Exchange, 95 n 

Royalls, 74, 76, 77, 83, 85,91, 99, 128, 
129, 259, 310, 313, 314, 318, 337-339- 
386, 407, 408, 427 ; carried by 
the ships in the Second Voyage, 
56, 60; Third Voyage, 122; bor- 
rowed of the Dutch, 286 ; rate at 
which they are to be reckoned, 324; 
English equivalent of Spanish, 489 

Rubies, 83, 84, 150 

Ruding's Annals of the Coinage of 
Great Britain quoted, 13 n 

Rundall's Voyages to-wards the North- 
West referred to, 99 n 



Russell, William, 484 
Russia, 320, 490 

Safe conduct to be obtained from 

the Grand Signior, draft of, 266 ; 

granted by the Grand Signior for 

trade in the Red Sea, 434 
Saffron, 150 

Saffron -coloured cloths, 75 n 
Sago, 73, 78 ; use of, in Banda, in lieu 

of bread, 73 
Sailing directions for a voyage to the 

East Indies, 80 
Sainsbury, Mr. Noel, 368 n 
St. Andrew, John, 295 
St. Augustine, 118, 136, 153, 154,244, 

333> 402 
St. J-ago, a Portuguese ship, lost on 

Flats of Judea, 118 n 
St. Thome, 73, 75, 79, 85, 261 
Saker (a piece of ordnance), 82 n 
Sal ammoniac, 337, 406 
Salbancke, Joseph, 165, 235, 265 ; 

royal commission to, for the 

Twelfth Voyage, 442 ; notice of, 

235 n 
Saldanha, 55, 136, 137, 153, 298, 333, 

402, 415 ; road 134 n bay, 227 n 
Salisbury, Earl of, 26 n, 32 n, 44, 120, 

206, 216, 217, 219, 282, 356, 429; 

parrots, monkeys, &c., to be 

obtained for, 130, 301 
Sallallo (piece goods), 74, 78 
Salmon, Robert, 484 
Salstonested, Samuel, 46 
Salter, Nicholas, 165 
Samaritan, ship, 115 n, 452 
Sana, Pasha of, 235 n 
Sanders wood (Sandalwood), 289 n, 

340, 406, 410, 427 
Sandie, Robert, 164, 169, 280, 294 
Santonin, 199^ 
Sandy, John, n n 
Sandys' Travels in Purchas referred 

to, 337 n 

Sappan wood, 61 n 
Sapphires, 83 

Sarassa (piece goods), 73, 74, 79 
Sarcenet, 77 n 
Sarkhej, 287 n 
Saris, John, 33 n, 91, 04, 286 n, 312, 

399 n, 411, 413 n, 415, 416, 420, 

422 n, 423 n, 434 n ; Company's 

commission to, for the Eighth 

Voyage, 396 ; notice of, 92 n 
Sayes, 98, 131, 261 



526 



INDEX. 



Scaveson, 337 

Scissors, 8 1, 82 

Scotland, 193, 194 

Scott, Edmond, 34, 35, 64, 101, 280, 
286, 289, 293, 312; agreement with 
the Company for arbitration of a dis- 
pute, 293 ; his relation of events at 
Bantam, 65 n ; his account of fires 
at Bantam, 91 n ; quoted with refer- 
ence to Dutch and English friend- 
ship, 93 n ; Lancaster's instructions 
to, 34 ; notice of, 34 n 

Scott, George, agreement with the 
Company for arbitration of a dis- 
pute, 293 

Scottish East India Company, letter 
from James I. for the establishment 
of a, 490 

Scurvy, use of lemon juice as a pre- 
ventive of, 100 n 

Seal, the Company to have a com- 
mon, 168 ; special, to be used by the 
Company for commissions, 475 

Second Joint Stock Voyage, 115 n 

Second Joint Stock, instructions to 
Richard Mountney for the keeping 
of the accounts of the, 502 

Second Voyage, the, 46 n, 90 n, 115 n, 
120 n, 134 n, 227 n, 239*1, 304 n ; 
royal commission to Sir Henry 
Middleton for, 48; Company's 
commission to, 51 ; private trade 
forbidden in, 57 ; arrival of home- 
coming ships at Plymouth, &c., 

87 

Segar, Sir William, 19 n, 103 n 

Semar, 73 

Senna, 201 

Seran (or Ceram), description of, 78, 
264, 265 ; wares to be sold there, 78 

Setwell, 200, 480 

Seventh Voyage, the, 114^, 421 n, 
422 n ; Company's agreement with 
Peter Floris and Lucas Antheumis 
for the management of, 363 ; plans 
of Peter Floris and Lucas Antheumis 
for, 427 ; royal commission to 
Anthony Hippon for, 359 ; Com- 
pany's commission to, 369 ; revised 
copy of, 379 ; none but engaged 
men to proceed in, 377 ; instructions 
as to presentation of the royal 
letters to Eastern potentates, 384 ; 
letters from James I. to Eastern 
potentates, &c., carried in, 421- 
426 ; private trade forbidden, 366, 



375, 385 ; sealed instructions taken 
out in, 377, 386, 388 

Shah Abbas, 442 n 

Shah Jahan, 479 n 

Shapton, Francis, bond entered into 
by, for the Fourth Voyage, 223 

Sharpie, Alexander, 106, 236-238, 
240 n, 247 n, 263, 287, 291, 311, 
346 ; enquiries to be made as to 
factories settled by, 347 ; royal 
commission to, for the Fourth 
Voyage, 227 ; Company's commis- 
sion to, 240 ; list of documents 
delivered to, for the Fourth Voyage, 
264 ; letter from the Company to, 234 

Shashes, 337 

Shaw's Charters of the East India 
Company referred to, 500 n 

Sherington, John, 281 

Sherley, Sir Robert, 442 n, 457 ; his 
notes on Persian ports, 458 n 

Ships : See Assention, Charles, Clove, 
Consent, Dragon, Expedition, 
Globe, Hector, Hope, Hopewell, 
Hosiander, James, Lesser James, 
Lion, Little Darling, Merchant 
Royal, Merchants' Hope, New 
Year's Gift, Peppercorn, Rose, 
Samaritan, Solomon, Susan, 
Swan, Thomas, Thomasine, Trades 
Increase, Unicorn, and Union ; 
cabins not to be built or altered, 
&c., 343, 376, 415 ; to keep com- 
pany one with another, 54, 117, 242, 
33) 399 i opening and closing of 
hatchways during shipments, 258, 
299 ; insides to be matted before 
shipment of spices, 259, 300 ; in- 
structions as to reception of Customs 
officers boarding home-coming, 
305 ; instructions for loading of 
spices, &c., 128 ; instructions as to 
relief of, when in want of men or 
provisions, 378, 386 ; of interlopers 
to be arrested, 497 ; number to sail 
annually, 182 

Shipton, Thomas, 166, 281 

Siam, 363 n, 413 n, 427, 428 

Siam (or Syrian), 59 n 

Sian rowles, 34 

Silk, 60, 309, 312, 409, 455-457. 462; 
Canton, 339; China, 150, 260,286, 
301, 408, 428; Lamkin, 286, 339; 
Persian, 338, 407, 455-457 ; private 
trade in, forbidden, 58, 299 

Silver, gold preferred to, 129, 259 



INDEX. 



527 



Sind, 457, 459 
Sindi cloth, 73, 75, 78, 79 
Singapore, Straits of, 428, 430 
Sipann (piece goods), 77, 79 n 
Sixth Voyage, the, 46 n, in n, 114 w, 
308 n, 309 n, 318 n, 408, 409 ; royal 
commission to Sir Henry Middle- 
ton for, 356 ; Company's com- 
mission to, 328; instructions to Law- 
rence Femell and others in, 319; 
letter to the factors of the Fourth 
Voyage sent in, 308 ; letter to the 
commanders of the Fourth Voyage 
sent in, 311 ; letter to the factors at 
Bantam sent in, 312; letter to the 
factors at Surat sent in, 315 ; royal 
letters carried out to various Eastern 
potentates, 348-355 ; none but en- 
gaged men to proceed in, 345 ; 
private trade forbidden, 310, 317, 

344 

Skinner, Augustine, 165, 281 
Skinner (or Skynner), Nicholas, 281 ; 

bill of adventure to, for the Fourth 

Voyage, 272 
Skinner's Etymologicon referred to, 

201 n 

Slany, Francis, 326, 328, 336 
Smith, see Smyth 
Smyth, Humphrey, 100, 164, 267 n, 

268, 269, 281, 295, 484; letter to, 

267 

Smyth, John, 95 
Smyth, Sir Thomas, 10, 45, 46 n, 90, 

164, 186, 219*2, 224, 234 n, 235, 239, 

240, 281, 286, 288 n, 292-294, 328, 

347 n > 3 6 3> 366, 484; letter to, 

and others, 9 ; letters from, 307, 

308 ; appointed first governour, 169 ; 

notice of, 10 n 
Smyth, William, 166 
Smythes, George, 166, 281 
Smyth's Sailor's Word Book referred 

to, 116 n, 268 n 
Snaphances, 76, 78 
Soap, 100 
Socotra, 82, 119, 124, 153, 154, 235 n, 

246, 251, 333, 342, 347, 402, 410, 

411 ; king of, letters from James I. 

to the, 351, 392 
Soerabaja, 424 n 
Sofala, 333, 402 
Solomon, ship, 449 
Sommer-Island Company, 10 n 
Soule, Thomas, 224 n 
South America, 446 n 



Southacke, Thomas, 165 

Southwicke, Thomas, 281 

Spain, 67, 93 n, 191, 192, 193, 194, 
195, 219 n, 220, 289, 335 n, 349, 
430, 431 ; ships and subjects of, not 
to be molested without provocation, 
51, 113, 230, 284, 358, 361, 439, 444, 
451, 454, 465, 476, 495; licence to 
take vessels of, 192 

Spalding, Augustine, 95, 290, 291, 
298, 341 ; notice of, 95 n 

Speede, William, 328 

Speilberg, Spilberg or Spillesbie, 
Captain, 65 

Spencer, Edmond, 166 

Spencer, Samuel, 193 

Spencer, Sir John, 164, 281 

Spenser quoted, 200 n, 406 n 

Spices, 124, 126, 150, 158, 459 ; 
letters patent for the mitigation of 
the statute for garbling, 199 ; rela- 
tive to the garbling of, 479 ; petition 
for the mitigation of the statute for 
garbling, 205 ; pursers to keep 
account of all shipments, 299 ; short 
weight, and bad condition of those 
received from Bantam, 148 ; in- 
structions for shipment of, 128, 257, 
259, 300 ; to be cleansed, 325 

Spikenard, 200, 480 

Squier, William, instructed to relieve 
English prisoners at Lisbon, 306 

Stammels, 74, 77, 78, 85, 96, 97, 462 

Standards, 268 

Stanhope, Lord, 44 

Staper, Richard, 19 n, 164, 169, 281 

Star Chamber, 399 n 

Starkie (or Stark ey), William, 56, 60, 
61, 63-65, 166, 289; Lancaster's 
instructions to, 34 ; made chief at 
Bantam, 35 ; letter to, 38 

Stavesacre, 201, 480 

Steel, 81, 85, 131, 261, 288 

Steel, Richard, letter to the Company 
relative to trade in Persia, 457 ; 
proposed establishment of water- 
works for Agra, 460 ; notice of, 

457 n 

Stevens, Mr., 274 n 
Stile (or Style), Humphrey, 164, 281 
Stile (or Style), Oliver, 164, 169, 281, 

294 

Stile (or Style), Roger, 51, 52, 56, 62 
Stile (or Style, or Sty lie), Thomas, 

281, 294, 328 n, 347 n 
Stocker, Mathew, 281 



5 28 



INDEX. 



Stockfish, 101, 1 02 

Stockley (or Stokeley), John, 165, 
166 n, 281 

Stockley, Mrs., 166 n 

Stone, William, 164, 484 

Stores, account to be kept of expendi- 
ture of gunners', carpenters', and 
other, 379, 418; surplus, may be 
sold, 257 

Stoughton (or Stoweton), John, 326, 
328, 336 

Stow's Survey quoted, igi n, 460 n 

Strange animals and birds to be ob- 
tained, 130, 301, 305, 327, 347, 378, 
387, 416 

Stratford, Anthony, 166 , 281 

Stratford, Richard, 281, 295 

Stratforde, Robert, 166 

Sturdyman, Lawrence, 94 

Style, Styles and Stylle, see Stile 

Subscriptions, Council order relative 
to unpaid, I, 9; Council's second 
order for better payment of pro- 
mised, 12 ; warrant summoning 
defaulting adventurers to bring in 
their arrears, 18; rules for payment 
of, 1 60 

Suffolk, Earl of, 44 

Sugar, 338, 407, 459 

Sukadana, 287, 288 n, 326 n 

Sumatra, 47 n, 69, 70, 72, 84, 158, 
264, 290 n, 429, 430 

Sumatra, Pulo, 135 n 

Sunda, Straits of, 84 

Surat, 46 n, 73, 103, in n, 120 n, 
122, 124, 126 n, 219, 220, 228 n, 
233 n > 235 n > 2 47 n > 248, 251, 252, 
254, 256, 287, 311, 318 n } 320, 321, 
322, 325, 326, 329, 333-335. 338, 
340-343, 346, 347, 349, 389, 390, 
402, 403, 408-411, 417, 437 n, 443, 
457 n > 458 n, 459-461, 463 n- Com- 
pany's library at, 419 n ; factors to 
be left at, 254, 255, 256 ; lead sold 
at, 316; letters from James I. to the 
king of, 105, 231, 232; letter to the 
factors at, sent in the Sixth Voyage, 
315 ; Portuguese capture of two 
English boats near, 219 n, 220, 
315, 349, 351, 390, 391 ; instruc- 
tions for opening up trade at, 124, 

253 

Susan, ship, 8, 9 n, 46 n, 51 n, 53 n, 
56, 62, 63, 65, 90, 91, 134, 148, 153, 
193, 196, 246, 430; loss of, 134 n; 
petition from the master and com- 



pany of, for share in certain prize 

money, 26 

Swan, ship, 288 n, 290 , 463 
Sweden, 193, 194, 446 n 
Swinarton, John (the younger), 164 
Swordblades, 288, 335, 404 
Swords, 150 
Sydall, Henry, 91, 92, 94, 148, 285, 

290, 292, 298, 312 
Symonds, Thomas, 165, 281, 294 
Syrian, 59 n 
Sysan, Siam, or Syrian, 59 

Table Bay, 100 n 

Taffasole, 430 

Taffaties, 77, 78, 428 

Taffeta-sarcenet, 77 n 

Talbot, Thomas, 166 

Talby (or Tailbie), Richard, 165, 281 

Tamarie, 410 

Tanknyla (piece goods), 75 

Tannies (piece goods), 77 

Tatta, 252 n 

Taylor, Francis, 100, 165, 281 

Taylor's Sailing Directory referred to, 
Ii8n 

Tecco, 47 n, 222 n 

Telle Pricken (piece goods), 73 

Tenexto (piece goods), 77 

Tenkees (coins), 76 

Tenth Voyage, the, royal commission 
to Thomas Best and Thomas Aid- 
worth for, 437 

Ternate, 67, 69, 74, 85, 153, 429, 430; 
Sir Francis Drake's visits to, 68, 
429; factory to be settled at, 129, 
259 ; king of, letter from, to James 
I., 68 

Thibet, 58 n 

Third Voyage, the, 51 n, 114 n, 115 n, 
267 n, 290 n, 308 n, 322, 324; 
Admiralty warrant to apprehend 
deserters, no, 209; adventurers in, 
275 ; bills of adventure for, 138, 
139; form of, 274; bonds entered 
into, by the commanders and others, 
for, 145-147 ; by factors and their 
sureties, 140, 143; royal commission 
to William Keeling and William 
Hawkins for, in ; Company's com- 
mission to, 1 14 ; estimates for the, 95, 
98, 99 ; estimated provisions and 
stores for, 99, 102 ; estimated results 
of, 98, 99 ; factors of, to co-operate 
with those of the Fourth Voyage, 
236 n, 237 ; Lancaster's instructions 



INDEX. 



529 



for, 136 ; letters to David Middleton 
and William Keeling on occasion of, 
!53 I 54J letters to be prepared for 
various Eastern potentates, 103; 
none but engaged men to proceed 
in, 130 

Thomas, ship, inn, II5, 396, 398, 
401, 402, 404, 405, 411, 452 

Thomas, the barber, 37 

Thomas, ^L.,\\\sNumismata Orientalia 
referred to, 287 n 

Thomasine, ship, U5, 452 

Thompson, E. Maunde, his edition of 
Richard Cocks's Diary referred to, 
398 n 

Thornton, Giles, H5, 328, 347 

Threle (piece goods), 77 

Tidore, 74, 104, 153, 430 ; Dutch and 
Portuguese at variance with the king 
of, 67, 104; factory to be settled at, 
129, 259 ; king of, letter to James L, 
67 ; royal letters to, 107, 231, 353, 
393 42i 

Tin, 81, 83, 84, 96, 131, 150, 288,334, 
335 403 4?4 457 4^2 ; East India, 
to be obtained for trial and proof, 
134, 262 

Tools, how to preserve from rust, 86 

Towerson, Gabriel, 33, 36-38, 52 n, 91, 
92, 94, ill n, 147, 148, 289, 291, 312, 
405, 411, 415, 416, 420; Company's 
commission to, for the Eighth Voyage, 
396 ; his private dealings with the 
Dutch, 136 ; notice of, 33 n 

Towerson, Robert, 165 

Torya, or Tooria (piece goods), 73, 74, 

77 79 

Trades Increase, ship, 46 w, 47 , 
ii4, 228 n, 309, 328, 329, 335, .338 

Tripoli (in Syria), 320 

Trotter, Thomas, 281 

Tudd, Thomas, 33, 36-38, 64 

Turbith, 337, 406 

Turkey, 266, 288, 434 ; English inter- 
course with, 104, 1 06, 120, 354, 394, 
434, 456, 459 ; letters to be sent 
home through, 245 

Turkish customs on Persian goods, 
462 

Turmeric, 200, 480 

Turner, William, 166 

Turnor, James, 164 

Twelfth Voyage, the, 235 n ; royal 
commission to Christopher New- 
port and Joseph Salbancke for, 
442 



Tzier or Tzijnd (piece goods), see 
Sindi cloth 

Unicorn, ship, 463 

Union, ship, 227 n, 228 n, 237, 240, 
272, 273, 313, 316, 399 n, 401 ; lost 
off the coast of Brittany, 222 n, 
228 n 

Utley, George, 166 

Valabhi, 287 n 

Valerian, 200 , 201 n 

Van der Hagen, Steven, 80 n 

Van Harell, John, 433 

Van Os, Dericke, 433 

Vansleb's Present State of Egypt 

referred to, 201 n ; his references 

to indigo, 287 n 
Velvets, 76-78, 335; China, cheaper 

than English, 74, 77 
Venice, 122 n 

Venice reds (cloths), 85, 96-98, 462 
Verhoven, Arnold, letters from Ban- 
tam to be sent through, 150 
Vermilion, 335 
Victualling estimates for the Third 

Voyage, 99, 102 
Victuals, provision of, for the ships of 

the First Voyage, 1 1 
Vincent's Commerce and Navigation 

of the Ancients referred to, 59 n 
Virginia, /|/|2 n 
Virginian plantations, 10 n 

Wages, part only to be paid in the 
Indies, 324, 418 

Walcheren, Island of, 151 n 

Waldoe (or Waldore) Lawrence, 165 

Waldoe, Robert, 165, 281 

Wales, Henry, Prince of, 446 n 

Walker, George, 281 

Wallcott (or Walcoate), Humphrey, 
165, 281 

Walsingham, Sir Thomas, letter to, 
requesting punishment of two car- 
penters, 307 

Walter, Edward, 166 

Walton, William, 165 

Warrant, Admiralty, to apprehend 
deserters, no, 209 ; for the coinage 
of special money for the First 
Voyage*, 13; for the exportation of 
foreign money in the Fifth Voyage, 
282 ; for the transportation of 300 
into Ireland, 355 

Washer, Richard, 166 

I O 



530 



INDEX. 



Wastell, William, 165, 281 
Watchets (woollen stuff), 98, 405, 

462 
Water casks, 134, 246, 302, 333, 375, 

402 
Waterworks, Richard Steel's pro- 



posal for, at Agra, 460 
Wai 



Watson, Thomas, wharfinger, agree- 
ment with, for unloading of ships, 
89 

Watts, John, 281 

Watts, Sir John, 10 n t 164, 281, 
328 n ; notice of, 164 n 

Way mouth, George, 190 ; agree- 
ment with, for a voyage for the dis- 
covery of a North-West passage, 
21 ; notice of, 21 n 

Webb, Rowland, 326, 328, 336 

Weekes, Richard, 309 

Weights and Measures, of Amboyna 
and Banda, 80 ; English and foreign, 
to be compared before trading, 258, 
300; Portuguese and Dutch, 80; 
Persian, 462 

West Indies, 429 

Westwray (or Westrowe), Thomas, 
101, 165, 281, 295, 484 

Weyes, 101 

Wheat, steel, 99 n, 102 

Wheeler, Ambrose, 1 66 

White, , 235 n 

White, Leonard, 165, 281 

White, Thomas, 165, 281, 295 

Whiteley, Thomas, 295 

Whitmore, George, 165 



Wiche (or Wise), Richard, 165, 169 

Wickham, Richard, 233 n, 399 ; 
notice of, 399 n 

Willaston, William, 165, 281 

Williams, Mr., 40 

Williams, John, 326, 328, 336 

Wilson, Thomas, 219 n 

Wilson's Theatre of the Hindus re- 
ferred to, 59 n 

Wiseman (orWyseman), Richard, 164, 
169, 281 

Wolstenholme, Sir John, 164, 281, 
305 n notice of, 46 n 

Wooddis, Richard, 288 

Woodnoth, George, 80, 91, 92, 94 

Worcester, Earl of, 44 

Wormseeds, 199, 337, 406, 463, 480 

Wotton, Lord, 44 

Wragge, John, 165 

Wragge, Richard, 165 

Wright, Anthony, 80 

Wright, Edward, the mathematician, 
46 n 

Wright, Lionel, 166 n 

Wright, Richard, 19 n, 166; notice 
of, 166 n 

Wyseman, Richard, see Wiseman 

Yedo, 413 n 

Yellow a joyous colour among the 

Hindus, 75 n 
Yemen, 436 

Zamorin, the, of Calicut, 83 
Zanzibar, 81, 119, 134, 245 ,246, 399 n 
Zedoary, 199 , 200 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 



UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY